
--- Page 1 ---
Baer, Susanne (2026) What judges need to know: the anti-factual challenge and
judicial review. Modern Law Review, 89(1), 3 - 27.
https://doi.org/10.1111/1468-2230.70013
https://researchonline.lse.ac.uk/id/eprint/130384/
Version: Published Version
Licence: Creative Commons: Attribution 4.0
LSE Research Online is the repository for research produced by the London School
of Economics and Political Science. For more information, please refer to our Policies
page or contact lseresearchonline@lse.ac.uk

--- Page 2 ---
THE
MODERN LAW REVIEW
Volume 89
January 2026
No. 1
What Judges Need to Know: The Anti-Factual
Challenge and Judicial Review
Susanne Baer
Imagine you are a judge, at a supreme court, a constitutional court, or a human
rights court in particular. There are new files on your desk. You open them,
and find empirical studies on both sides, to attack a statute, and to defend it.
They look pretty much the same.How do you decide? This is the question that
drives this lecture. It is a call for cognitive resilience and for a refined doctrine of
constitutional epistemology. It is about nothing less than the truth, the whole
truth, which seems to slip away because truth is in crisis. More precisely, to
counter the trend summarising rather diverse phenomena as ‘crisis’, the truth
is in crisis because knowledge is systematically undone, as either illegitimate or
outright false, or wrong. But what does that mean for the law, for courts and

--- Page 3 ---
for judicial review in particular? My argument is to not only take the law, or
rights, but also to take facts seriously, in order to deal with the anti-factual
challenge.
Certainly, it is not a new question to address knowledge, and truth, in law.
Namely, evidence is a classic theme, primarily in criminal law, but even that
needs an update in light of today’s technologies of manipulation, and the need
for a convincing response is rather urgent. Certainly, the quest for a proper
understanding of knowledge is also not a petty concern, and not just a legal
one. But the issue of persuasion tends to overshadow a quest for epistemol-
ogy, and thus, heuristics. Instead, to understand facts, knowledge, and truth
in law, and specifically the handling of extra-juridical knowledge in consti-
tutional adjudication, we need interdisciplinary attention, at least for those in
socio-legal studies.This is also a proper stance for Chorley lectures,with H.L.A.
Hart talking about nothing less than the ‘Demystification of the Law’ in 1972,
and Roberto Unger eventually, in 1995, rejecting ‘rationalising legal analysis’
with its ‘institutional fetishism’ as rather limited and frail, to seek an alternative
in legal thought without adjudication. I will not go there. But reading the
Modern Law Review, it becomes pretty clear that Chorley lectures have also
addressed the changing conditions of knowledge,including data, truth,and the
law. In 1999, Kader Asmal described the South African practice of the Truth
and Reconciliation Commission an alternative way of dealing with facts, in-
cluding colonial trauma, which remains a challenge.And closer to the focus on
truth in crisis, Anthony Giddens in 1998 discussed German sociologist Beck’s
4

--- Page 4 ---
notion of the ‘risk society’ a world of insecurity,not least,because of a lack of
knowledge on many fronts. But times have changed, and risk has turned into
doubt, fuelled by lies and manipulation. How do we handle this now?
Chorley Lectures have also dealt with judicial review, understood as the task
and power of courts to review and strike down legislation, administrative acts
and court decisions. Skepticism is in order, resulting in constructive criticism
at best,not to be confused with the attacks levelled by those seeking unrestricted
power for themselves.I defend judicial review as indispensable for a democracy
that deserves the label. Not surprisingly, this falls in line with the first female
president of the German Constitutional Court, Jutta Limbach, explaining the
‘Concept of the Supremacy of the Constitution’. In fact, national as well
as regional and global human rights courts have become important actors in
making sure that democracy is not a cover-up for autocrats. Certainly, there
are varieties to constitutionalism, but the commitment to an enforceable set of
rights and principles is key. Therefore, in 2011, Kate O’Regan, a former judge
of the South African Constitutional Court, reminded us to not forget about
the text, because it is really about the law, not politics, and already wondered
how much room there is for what Waldron calls ‘reasonable disagreement’.
No need to be afraid, because even proportionality rulings in the House of
Lords did not lead to exaggerate uses of power, as Thomas Poole demonstrated
by putting some well-established criticism of constitutionalism to the empirical
test. But what happens to judicial review, and thus, to fundamental rights and
democracy, when confronted with the anti-factual challenge?
What is the role of courts when facts,expertise and knowledge,and thus,the
truth, are in a precarious position, in an endangered state, and eventually erod-
ing? Courts must apply the law, yes, and that is difficult enough, but what are,
today,the facts of a case? How should supreme,constitutional and human rights
courts handle facts,knowledge,the truth,when these are called into question,
often radically so? This is an urgent question because, epistemologically, things
have changed.
I saw it in my files.Serving as a Justice of the German Federal Constitutional
Court from 2011 to 2023, there were many complicated legal questions to
5

--- Page 5 ---
answer,including the need to systematically integrate national,transnational and
international law, and to make use of comparative analysis. However, it was
the facts that bothered the Court in the climate case, the Covid cases, the
decision to not discriminate against people that are medically intersexual, and
more. And again, this is not a German problem. In the UK, think of the ‘facts’
that made Britain go to war against Iraq, or the ‘facts’ spread about migration
as well as human rights by the Brexit campaign, or what has been dubbed a
‘gender-war’ around transgender rights. Facts matter, and we know by now
that they are manipulated, or ignored, while lies are mislabelled. In politics, this
has been recognised as a particular abuse of power. Now what about courts?
They are under many pressures, but the post-factual challenge may be more
dangerous than the rest. When courts are called upon to decide, what should
judges know,accept as true or reject as false,presented by government and other
parties?
In 2025,a young Iranian,Noureen Akhtar,posted the question online:‘What
is Justice in a Post-Truth World?’ Justice,she says,or Justitia,cannot any longer
be the figure with a pair of scales and certainly not blindfolded, but has to now
see ‘through the digital smog of deceptions masked as facts and noise mas-
querading as knowledge’. How can this be done? Akhtar says that there is a
crisis of knowledge, a crisis of truth, which I call ‘the anti-factual challenge’.
What does this mean for the law? As much as the rule of law is the gram-
mar of democracy, we must confront this question: How should courts deal
6

--- Page 6 ---
with truth, thus uncover and reject beliefs, assumptions, and lies, in a polarised,
triggering, wild world?
There is little time to find an answer. Note that the truth did not just slip
into crisis on its own. Rather, it is kicked around, beaten up, mobbed and,
sorry for the term, ‘shitstormed’ out of our minds, or should we say phones,
aggressively. The same with democracy: it does not simply die, as US political
scientists famously described in 2018, but it is murdered. This is done by
people described as autocrats, which I call the new totalitarians because of the
updated arsenal of weapons to destroy democracy,and thus legitimacy grounded
in fair elections, human rights, and the rule of law. Therefore, the time to care
for truth is now.What is the role of courts in a ‘culture of justification’? What
should judges know, as well as lawmakers, lawyers, academics, all of us, to deal
with the anti-factual challenge?
I describe the challenge first, to understand what is happening, how and
where it matters, and why this crisis behind the crisis is of such grave concern.
It affects all areas of legal practice, but my focus is on supreme, constitutional
and human rights courts, and judicial review. What kind of facts matter there,
and why? What is the role of such courts under these new conditions,and how
can they handle the challenge? There are many answers to these questions, and
hopefully, there will be more, to better understand the epistemological role of
courts in judicial review. I will end with a call for updated legal education.
THE ANTI-FACTUAL CHALLENGE
We do not live in post-factual times, but we are faced with a severe anti-factual
challenge. It is a highly polluted environment. Truth, facts, expertise, reality
tends to get lost. And this is not new.
In 1943, George Orwell commented on fascist propaganda. He wrote: ‘This
kind of thing is frightening to me,because it often gives me the feeling that the
very concept of objective truth is fading out of the world’. Then, philoso-
7

--- Page 7 ---
pher Hannah Arendt, a close observer of German fascism, explained that lies
‘are often used as substitutes for more violent means’, and thus ‘are apt to be
considered relatively harmless tools in the arsenal of political action’. She al-
ready described an ‘extreme contempt for facts’, and a trend she called ‘Defak-
tualisierung’, or de-factualisation, as essential to the rise of totalitarianism.
Today, contempt is back, and some saw it coming. In England and Ger-
many, ‘post-truth’ was the word of the year in 2016; the ‘decay of truth’ was
described in 2018; a ‘truth crisis’ in 2021. Former US President Barack
Obama called it an ‘epistemological crisis’ in 2020. So what is going on,
exactly?
The crisis of truth,and facts,is a crisis behind the crises.In various ways,it in-
forms,shapes and perpetuates the financial crisis,the health crisis of a pandemic
like Covid,the climate crisis and,last but not least,war,be it in cyberspace,with
drones or in trenches, all of which result in mass migration, which is a crisis of
human rights. Look at it this way: The truth about international finance? The
truth about the virus,and injections,the shots? Climate expertise – who knows?
War – or is it an ‘operation’, ‘aggression’, or ‘self-defence’ – so hard to tell, and
with AI producing imagery at will, the ‘sources cannot be verified’. So what
are the facts?
It is a crisis, and it is also a paradox. There is so much data out there, so
many facts. We know more than ever, but we do not know what information
to trust. Then, it is not knowledge but belief that becomes decisive. Facts are
there, but they may be manipulated, fake and false. Therefore, this is not just
another struggle over meaning. Rather, our shared epistemic foundation is
eroding, if not gone.
This is extremely uncomfortable. Economically, post-industrial societies
have been described as ‘knowledge societies’, and much effort goes into
education and study, training, research, and information management. But
when knowledge loses its standing, what then? Politically, democracy suf-
8

--- Page 8 ---
fers. The less ability to agree on facts and then discuss what to do about
them, the less legitimacy is attributed to decisions. Philosophically, founda-
tions are lost, because a discursive community and communicative action,
according to Jürgen Habermas, or systems of communication, according
to Niklas Luhmann and Günter Teubner, or the idea of democracy as a
‘marketplace’,mostly of ideas, are all based,in one way or another,on a com-
mitment to truth,information,knowledge,facts.When this is gone,democracy
becomes a fake performance. Are we thus bound, as sociologist Helmut
Willke suggested in 2002, in early studies on the knowledge crisis, towards
dystopia?
Democracy did not turn into ‘expertocracy’. Also, the ‘espistemocracy’, in
which factual coercion – ‘Sachzwänge’ – are said to define politics is not dom-
inant anymore. Instead, Korean-German philosopher Han sees ‘infocracy’
at work, and AI expert Nina Schick has already described the ‘infocalypse’.
The dominant political strategy is,excuse the language,to ‘flood the zone with
shit’, to quote an infamous radical who organises globally. This leads to info-
pollution,or ‘Informationsverschmutzung’,a strategy also known as ‘muddying the
waters’. However, American philosopher Harry Frankfurt already described
this in 1986, On Bullshit. There are more and more empty phrases, essentially
9

--- Page 9 ---
nonsense, coming into the world, and not linguistic games, à la Wittgenstein.
They produce doubt, and eventually an ignorant society. How many people
have told you lately they avoid the news? Then,what matters is not what is true,
or fact. What matters is what works, and, to whoever asks a question, what is
believed, gets likes and clicks, provokes a reaction, no matter what. Ignorance is the
sign of power, of new totalitarianism on the rise.
Flooding the public is not a new strategy,but technologies intensify the flood.
To spread disinformation is much easier today than in the 1940s, when Orwell
and Arendt worried, and it is less visible. Today, there is no ‘Volksempfänger’, a
low-cost radio produced in 1933 to disseminate Nazi Propaganda in Germany,
no paper most people read, and certainly no citizens’ assembly, no marketplace.
One should not forget all those that organise neighbourhoods,rallies,and other
forms of associative democracy. But the dominant form of communication are
blurbs, be it text or picture, on the still so-called ‘social’ but deeply unsocial
bubbles of media technology. In programming, knowledge matters for sure,
and facts do, as reliable science to invent, design and build technology and
algorithms. This is why those who spread lies aggressively defend their codes,
their patents, their technology.
The goal is clear: You shall be totally absorbed in micro-targeted news,
which also caters to your entrepreneurial self that absorbed late capitalism
in what Michel Foucault calls ‘gouvernementalité’, with individuals governing
themselves. And it works. Recent elections show (not only in the US) that
‘muddying the water’ helps catch more fish, as voters, and many votes are cast
on the basis of emotional appeal. Also, protesting totalitarians when they are
taking over is but a passing swarm of very small fish online, thus no pressure,
and no change. Is this too pessimistic? At least, it has many sensible people
worried, like Akbhar, the young Iranian. And she is not alone. For example,
most delegates at the controversial but influential World Economic Forum at
Davos,an annual meeting of around 3,000 paying or selected investors,business
and political leaders, celebrities and journalists, agree. For the second year in a
row, they consider ‘disinformation’ the biggest short-term global threat, before
war and weather disasters, thus identifying an issue that did not even feature
on the worry list before 2024.
Also, all over the world, the new totalitarians are up and running. However
safe you may feel right now, don’t be fooled. There is a story often used: If
you put a frog in water slowly made to boil, it will not jump but die. Similarly,
post WW II-refugee, political scientist and first female US Secretary of State
Madeleine Albright describes the rise of fascism as plucking the chicken one
feather by one, so it does not shriek too loudly, but is dead in the end. This is
the strategy, and the ideology is ethnonationalist racist, heterosexist patriarchal,
10

--- Page 10 ---
ruthless and greedy, seeking societies to be run, again, by a leader, a ‘Führer’
now called a CEO, using effective technological control, and being profitable,
last not least. If things go wrong, there is still Mars. What may seem like one
of the weaker James Bond movie scripts is turned into a brutal reality. We are
not beyond knowledge,not ‘post-factual’. There is no natural sliding into this,
and facts do still matter, ie harm is done to people. But there is the anti-factual
challenge,as ‘counterknowledge’ and ‘alternative truth’,and the new mark of
power is to simply not care.
To avoid a misunderstanding: there was no golden era of truth. We have
no reason to romanticise the past. Truth was always contested, and there is
no distanced neutral objectivity. The history of science is also a history of
bias, which is what happens when you exclude women, for one. Luckily,
critical epistemologies in gender studies, critical race and postcolonial studies
and more allow us to uncover such biases, and understand the world much
better. Also, postmodernism started with Jean-François Lyotard’s 1979 re-
port on the conditions of knowledge, and did not simply denounce the
‘grand narratives’, but demonstrated that they were not necessarily true in
that they left out so much. But science stands for facts because it proceeds
systematically, not anecdotally. It rests on reflexive objectivity, not prejudice.
Here, criticism is not assault, and critical theory is not nihilism. Rather, critical
studies shed more light on the world, in that they enlighten us in the best
sense of the term. Similarly, Karl Popper and others insisted that we are
always but conditionally right, and have to take contingency into account.
The truth is relative, and knowledge is a living thing, which is why higher
education and research are, at best, engaged in collaborative scepticism, which
11

--- Page 11 ---
new totalitarians denounce and destroy. They attack gender studies first, and
critical race theory, in a strategy to enlist you, in case you are a bit sceptical
about these. A bit later, history is changed, by closing Holocaust studies,
rearranging exhibitions and retelling a nation’s history, and even medicine is
limited to what a health minister believes in, thus no research on vaccina-
tion, and so forth. This is how the anti-factual totalitarians discard truth and
facts.
Also note that some very powerful people, organisations, companies, parties
and governments, including presidents, have a keen interest in this loss of facts,
of objectivity,of shared epistemic standards,of a consented upon truth.To them,
those who object are not only wrong,but they are also not wanted,the ‘enemy’,
as the current US Vice President called universities in 2021. These autocrats
are ‘Merchants of Doubt’, in the, ironically named, marketplace of ideas. Al-
though the metaphor is often used to argue for free speech, it is flawed because
markets are not fair without regulation. The more this ‘market’ is unregulated,
the more aggressive and ruthless deal-makers produce their own truth, as well
as many ‘truths’ for many, to then simply not care, neither for facts nor for
other people.Then power gets away with lies,and spreading misinformation and
disinformation is profitable business.It works.This is the anti-factual challenge.
And isn’t it much more comfortable to simply believe, and have somebody else
take care of things? Isn’t it enough to feel it to be true, affirm identity, be safe in
my community – my bubble, no trouble. No discussion, please …
12

--- Page 12 ---
For sure, there is a paradox. There was never more knowledge, what Peter
Burke called the ‘knowledge explosion’ in 2012. Certainly, access to knowl-
edge is not even, but more widespread, easier and faster than ever. For a while,
the internet was a big promise, to finally get to know it all, but search engines
do not give you everything but sell ranks. Also, the sheer mass and plurality of
sources makes knowledge overwhelming, and we are lost in space. In addition,
there is more manipulation than ever, in cheating and lying and falsification,
as fake science and fake data, very easily done, but increasingly difficult to
expose, and online forever, thus hard to correct. There are more expert com-
mittees, but less trust in science, and in institutions generally. There is a
Rally-Round-the-Flag-Effect, as in the early days of the pandemic, but it
does not last,and trust often drops to lower levels than before. Then,as well as
facing global warming,and new versions of war,expertise becomes as needed as
it is precarious.We have seen facts aggressively denounced and delegitimated,
as well as manipulated and faked. So we live with more information but enjoy
no informational socialism; there are too many and no reliable facts, so much
expertise and less and less certainty. That puts the anti-factual challenge as the
crisis behind the crises, because there is no way, then, any longer for politics to
reach consensus, nothing to agree on but belief, assumptions and lies, thus no
democracy. Now what happens to the law?
REACTIONS IN LAW
How does law deal with or function in the anti-factual challenge? And what is
the role of law and its institutions in dealing with beliefs, assumptions, and lies,
all charged with emotions?
There are many answers to this question. Law as such has a ‘knowledge di-
mension’, and it affects all realms of legal practice. Some knowledge enters
regulation and some is excluded, legal knowledge is a factor in mobilising law,
and law itself carries information and produces knowledge, for example via
13

--- Page 13 ---
criminal law, or in the ‘code of capital’, or by ontologising sex as differ-
ence. Finally,all application of law rests on knowledge,as ‘the facts’.Therefore,
the more precarious the knowledge, the less functional and fair the law.
Regulation
Take regulation, and specifically, legislation. It may produce knowledge, but
it is also based on knowledge, filtered by regulatory actors like politics, and
not immune against distortion, manipulation and lies. As such, ‘information is
the lifeblood of regulatory policy’, ranging from regulating risk technologies,
through obligations to know what is coming and take precautionary measures
against harm, to regulating trade or the financial market with informational
rules. Also, civil law has been understood as a knowledge distribution scheme.
For example, tort law not only addresses injuries and harm, but also attributes
a responsibility to know, because the one who knows about a risk, damage, or
fault,or should have known,is made responsible,and may eventually have to pay.
Anyone at an informational disadvantage may not be obliged by a contract, as
when banks exploit dependency or when patriarchal inequality informs mar-
riage. However, in times of a post-factual challenge, it becomes ever more
difficult to see when law is epistemologically abused, turning ideology into re-
ality. And there is certainly more.
14

--- Page 14 ---
Administration: knowledge governance
The knowledge crisis also affects administration and the executive. Historically,
the modern state developed hand in hand with it knowing its people, but
there are so many numbers and studies now, and it is hard to tell which ones
are correct. But clearly, the knowledge dimension matters. Again, the Covid
pandemic is a telling example, with numbers on low and high risks of vaccines,
low and high infections rates, low and high death tolls, some true, some false –
who knows? The German Federal Constitutional Court has recognised that the
state,being responsible for life and health of the people,is obliged to collect and
organise knowledge, and if needed also incentivise expertise in government
and sponsored by government,from specialised branches to expert committees,
and agencies to research funding. But today, all relevant actors also have to deal
with the anti-factual challenge.
The judiciary
Finally, the judiciary is affected by, and has to handle the anti-factual challenge.
How are judges to deal with a world of beliefs,assumptions,and lies,all charged
with emotions?
Regarding emotions,courts are not known to host them,and law school does
not teach how. Instead, it is a dimension of human experience often excluded,
sometimes to the detriment of people, from the legal scene. Also, courts are
made to undo lies,as when the perpetrator covers the crime or the tort,or when
a witness tells anything but the truth,and we know a bit about adjudicative facts,
but not about the general facts that are at stake politically. Certainly as well,
courts are meant to replace assumptions with facts, as evidence and proof, to
dispel the ‘reasonable doubt’that protects the presumption of innocence,in dubio
pro reo. This is why criminal procedure laws require those who testify under
15

--- Page 15 ---
oath to stick to the best of their knowledge, ‘to the pure truth’ in Germany,
while British, Canadian, Indian, or South African law wants ‘the whole
truth’ and nothing but that. This also matters in civil law, regarding expertise in
claims of medical malpractice or car accidents,mould in the walls,contaminated
soil, or a defect in a new appliance. And it matters in administrative law, which
often refers to the ‘state of the art’ of knowledge in the relevant field. Here,
‘justice requires just laws, of course, and just administration of those laws; but it
also requires factual truth’.
Courts must find out what happened. They need to get the facts right,
at least as procedural truth, based on rules for discovery, disclosure and the use
of expertise. Note that the German law of judges, or Deutsches Richtergesetz,
requires a judge to swear that they will serve ‘but truth and justice’ (‘nur der
Wahrheit und Gerechtigkeit zu dienen’). Accordingly, the Constitutional Court
held that a judge who does not seek the truth violates the fundamental right
to a lawful judge. Somewhat differently, English and Welsh judges pledge
allegiance to King Charles and promise to ‘do right to all manner of people
after the laws and usages of this realm’, and I do particularly like that they
intend to do so ‘without fear or favour, affection or ill will’. This is also a
commitment to stick to the facts. After all, rationality, objectivity, neutrality is
what courts are all about. Again, to avoid misunderstandings, there is no reason
to romanticise. Law is a human enterprise, and humans may fail. It is a site of
power,its institutional design may be unfair,and its practice biased.But it is still
Justitia. What must she do?
16

--- Page 16 ---
JUDICIAL REVIEW
Courts need to get the facts right. Specifically, when they are tasked with, and
also engage in judicial review,which is sadly not to be taken for granted,courts
must assess whether factual claims to justify the law in question are right,correct,
in some way true. So what happens to judicial review, and thus to fundamental
rights and constitutionalism, when faced with the anti-factual challenge?
Again,imagine you are a judge,at a supreme court,a constitutional or human
rights court. There are new files on your desk, and you find studies supporting
both sides,to attack a statute and to defend it.They look pretty much the same,
but present opposing data as ‘the facts’.How do you decide who is right? In the
past, what looked scholarly was scholarly, reliable and could be used. Today,
that is no longer so.Previously,courts consulted experts recognised in a field.But
who is an expert today? Some are real, some fake, who knows, academic fields
fragmented,and quality unclear.How should judges know,since after all,we are
only lawyers? Previously, research by clerks and the judges themselves ‘found’
the facts. Today, there is too much information, overwhelming, confusing, and
unreliable.The paradox is not elsewhere.As an effect of the enormous quantity
and quality and speed of changing information online, it also hits the courts.
How then can any judge find a consented-upon truth of the matter? This is not
only an opportunity for self-reflection for a justice in doubt. It is a broader
concern, and reason to worry.
The facts that matter in judicial review are sometimes called legislative
facts, but this is too narrow a term.For now,I call them general facts, be it
the economic situation, the climate, the pandemic, migration, inequalities etc.
Such facts do matter on two levels: as normative updates and as justifications.
Normative updates
On the level of norms, general facts inform the standards to properly address
reality,turned into doctrine,or ‘Dogmatik’,as tests,theories or levels of scrutiny.
This is business as usual, because whoever interprets a constitution or human
rights treaty has to make sense of very few and often older words, in order to
17

--- Page 17 ---
deal with an everchanging complicated world. While laws may be amended,
constitutions and international law are meant to stay, which is why courts are
tasked to interpret the law and update our understanding of what these few
words mean.
Note that without the interpretative update, words lose their meaning,
which means that people lose rights, thus human beings lose protection. This
is what radical conservatives want. They insist on an ‘original meaning’, which
is a plausible and tempting idea. But such ‘original meaning’ is impossible
to find. Instead, it is a tentative, most likely biased, ideological excerpt from
a bigger but fragmented, not fully documented story. Also, lawyers are not
historians. But most importantly, the law loses its meaning when thrown
back into a distant past. No smartphones yet, no technology, no social and
cultural pluralism, much not yet understood. Thus, no meaning, and no justice.
Therefore, most courts and judges in the world reject the originalist approach.
Instead, constitutions and human rights treaties are treated as ‘living trees’ or
‘instruments’. In fact, this is highly plausible. To make sense of the law today,
the few old words need to be interpreted to be applied. If not, the job of a
judge, the job of a court cannot be done. Therefore, the task is to, humbly,
update the norm. This is when general facts matter, at best.
However, there is another option out there, a legalistic one, often fetishised,
and tempting.It is to not go empirical but idealistic.After all,lawyers are also not
sociologists, economists, climate scientists, migration studies experts, etc. Thus,
it seems easier to interpret the few words of constitutions and human rights
treaties based on an idea, a theory, a concept, a guiding principle or image, or
‘Leitbild’. A prime example is the legal subject, defined according to an image
of a human being, or ‘Menschenbild’, and not life’s reality. Liberty is, then, the
right of the ‘reasonable man’ to autonomy; and equality is, then, a right against
arbitrary treatment in a world imagined of ‘all men created equal’. But rather
obviously, this is a pretty narrow point of view, and biased. The reasonable man
becomes the inadequate norm to judge a world inhabited by, for starters, men
and women, and for those informed by current medical research, by people on
a gendered spectrum. Also, persons are in fact not more nor less reasonable, but
a fascinating mix of empathy and ego, emotions and rational thought, a physis,
or body, and a psyche, and more. Thus, such guiding images invite assumptions
of normality, belief, and bias, and exclude those that do not fit. Thus, to go
idealistic is a tempting idea but not a good one.
The better option is to go empirical,thus take general facts seriously to make
the realities of people’s lives inform our understanding of law. In this version of
realism, liberty is embedded in a social environment, as relational autonomy.
Then privacy is not reduced to a space called home but also protecting ‘infor-
18

--- Page 18 ---
mational self-determination’, and ‘the confidentiality and integrity of infor-
mation technology systems’. Also, rights to ‘speech’, ‘the press’ or ‘broad-
casting’ then cover the digital dimension, and a fundamental right to ‘family’
and ‘marriage’ covers more than a heteronormative patriarchal model, just as,
based on the current state of medical research, law then has a grip on varieties
of ‘sex’ and ‘gender’, on body and health, beyond the physical dimension, or
on disability, including chronic disease. These updates are needed for law to
make sense to people. However, it has become more difficult in the face of the
anti-factual challenge.
Justification
Normative change is not the only calling.General facts also matter on the level
of applying constitutional or human rights law. General facts are decisive as
to whether state action is legitimate and compatible with fundamental rights,
or not, the bread and butter of constitutionalism. Again, imagine you are the
judge:this is your job then.Whenever supreme,constitutional and human rights
courts engage in judicial review, to consider whether the government or the
legislator was allowed to do what they did, or if they went too far, such courts
have to assess general facts.It is what legality is based on.But this also means that
judicial review is a mechanism to check on the epistemological foundations of
power.
Often, this is a matter of separated powers and competence. Imagine a na-
tional government claims the power to handle an emergency situation, say to
send national troops to another country, or to a city in the nation, doing things
usually left to other authorities,be they international or local institutions.There
must be a reason to justify this move, thus, facts. Also, imagine a government
asking for special permission to limit your rights, like claiming a state of ex-
ception, the infamous ‘Ausnahmezustand’, or declaring war. There must be a
reason to do so, no fake news, no manipulated information, but facts. You
remember Iraq?
Similarly, facts are a matter of fundamental rights. When courts are called
upon to decide whether rights are violated,they need to know why something
was done, what it does to people, whether there are less intrusive alternatives,
and whether everything that matters was properly balanced. Interferences with
fundamental rights must be proportional, in short. Thus, facts matter. Tasked
with judicial review, it is the job of supreme, constitutional and human rights
19

--- Page 19 ---
courts to check whether a majority in power does things with a reason, thus
a proper assessment of facts. But in all these cases, judges face the anti-factual
challenge.
An assessment of facts often means that courts test for irrationality,as in Lord
Diplock’s basic account of judicial review, which intensifies when courts as-
sess proportionality, because it is all about facts: the fit between the measure
and the goal, the necessity of the intrusion and its alternatives, the overall ap-
propriateness or reasonableness of what has been done, taking into account the
effects on those affected. Certainly, there are exceptionally difficult situations,
like the German unification when a court in the West had to quickly under-
stand the realities in East Germany. But it is always difficult. Therefore, there
is a need for what one may call a ‘doctrine of constitutional epistemology’,to set
the standards of review in relation to the nature of facts.Think of a government
going to war.Think of the climate crisis,Covid or other pandemics like bird flu,
think of Brexit or think of the debate on gender. All of these are not questions
of morals or everyday norms or ideology, but of facts. Think of migration, too.
These are not just controversial issues, but deep in muddy waters. Populist
narratives overshadow legal analysis. There is not just disagreement, but also
disinformation,misinformation,lies or at least counter-narratives,and counter-
data, all not coincidental, but funded and organised, the public polarised, even
families deeply divided, scientific communities falling apart, just like social
movements, civil society. Last not least, courts are then portrayed as taking sides
in ‘truth’ disputes, depending on what they say, called ‘elitist’, ‘not neutral’, part
of the ‘system’, deserving no trust, no respect, or praised as being ‘on the right
side’. Sometimes, judges are denounced as ‘enemies of the people’, or for
simply getting it wrong, or as ideological, not legal, activists, while those on
20

--- Page 20 ---
the other side are celebrated as ‘heroes’. And today, these are not just political
comments but also epistemological challenges.
Today,criticism and more and more attacks on courts are framed in epistemic
rather than outright ideological or social terms. What happens when the judi-
ciary is labelled to be, simply, ‘not from this world’? Why would anyone trust
such a court,accept and follow a ruling,observe the standards? The more courts
rely on a notion of independent epistemic neutrality, the less they matter when
truth becomes irrelevant. Today, dismissive comments on courts and disregard
of court rulings are also elements of anti-factual politics. When knowledge,
expertise and truth go down the drain, courts and the rule of law are fast to
follow.
What are we to do about this? What can we expect, what should be done,
how can we help,as lawyers and as academics,to solve this problem? There will
be many answers, and hopefully a lot of research. I offer only two. The need to
revisit the role of courts tasked with judicial review, and to make sure that legal
education prepares future lawyers and judges and societies to deal with these
new callings.
Role of courts
Courts are interpreters of law. But what about the facts? What is the epistemo-
logical role of courts regarding knowledge, expertise, the truth?
Some see courts as ‘arbiters of truth’. At least in adversarial systems, some
call them referees.But constitutional justice is no soccer game.Others count on
courts as last bastions for reasoned justification of public matters in the public
sphere. ChatGPT told me that courts are ‘stewards of truth-based governance’.
As such, they demand transparency, rationality and accountability from state
actors, ie when government needs to inform and not lie to parliament, then,
constitutional and supreme courts become guardians of epistemic integrity, in
their request for reasons and in assessing them.In order not to turn into political
actors themselves, courts need to exercise institutional wisdom, thus not to
second-guess reality but kick the responsibility to know back into the field of
politics.
For courts to be a passive guardian is thus not enough.Confronting the anti-
factual challenge,courts must reject disinformation and uncover lies.Therefore,
I suggest thinking of courts not just as arbiters, but also, as Edith Beerdsen sug-
21

--- Page 21 ---
gested, as facilitators of a discursive truth, including the task of exposing
lies, and communicating what may be accepted as fact, and why. Again, judges
do not know it all. But to decide a case also means to curate expertise, and the
calling now is to expose what to accept as facts and why, and what must be re-
jected.Facilitators,curators and communicators,in a scheme of epistemological
separation of power, become core functions of the judiciary today.
Consider examples.The British prorogation case may serve as one.Certainly,
the ruling of the UK Supreme Court in R (on the application of Miller) v The Prime
Minister, Cherry and others v Advocate General for Scotland (known as Miller II)
has many dimensions. However, it may also be read as countering deception
and misleading pretence.The government claimed the prorogation was routine,
but other information and timing raised doubts, and the legal decision also
addressed an ideological fight.Did the ruling undo that,at least to some degree?
Later, attacks on judges are typical anti-factual moves discrediting institutions,
as is the reduction of the ruling to binary populist frames. Should courts say
more to counter that? Should academics criticise if they wish, but also explain,
in order to clarify the epistemological stakes?
Another example may be the German climate ruling. The files landed on
my desk in 2021.It is now considered a landmark decision because it introduced
a temporal dimension of liberty, the ‘intertemporal guarantee of freedom’. The
plaintiffs were rice farmers in Nepal and Bangladesh, and children in Germany,
among them the heirs to a North Sea farmstead shrinking with the sea level
rising.The question was simple: Did lawmakers do enough to prevent harm? As
usual, the answer depends upon the accurate assessment of general facts. What
about the climate? What are the adverse effects of carbon emissions, where,
when,and for whom? What can be done about it? In such a case,all dimensions
of climate studies matter, and all of them are under attack in anti-factual times.
For some, it is natural science and hard data; for others, it is a conspiracy or
22

--- Page 22 ---
simply all wrong. What, then, is the role of the court? In 2021, the German
Constitutional Court felt the need to spend quite a few pages on expertise,
thus facts, to explain why international sources are reliable, based on extensive
peer-review. Here, courts do engage in what may be seen as curating truth. It
has never been more important.
The Covid pandemic may serve as another example, with additional di-
mensions. Like many other courts, the German Federal Constitutional Court
received hundreds of complaints. All were reviewed, most have been decided
in chambers of three judges, some major cases went to the full Senate of
eight, like the cases on contact restrictions, school closures, mandatory
vaccination for healthcare workers, and disabled persons facing emergency
triage in hospitals. Clearly, there was a viral infection; many people were
falling ill and many died in Bergamo, New York, and German care homes.
But even in the face of death, the anti-factual challenge was louder than ever.
In the files, there were data, studies, articles, books, from professional and
academic associations, on both sides. What and who should we believe? In
such controversies, everything seems contested and is emotionally charged,
discussions polarised and polarising, including horror stories of a ‘deep state’,
collaborating with science. To complicate things, legal reactions to a pandemic
must also not only be based on facts, but require risk assessment, and thus
prognosis. Also, time matters, in that courts may have to decide quickly, either
required by rules of procedure, as in Colombia, or in emergency decisions.
Based on what? It is then a good idea for a court to invite experts and make
sure they are as diverse as possible, and the German court decided to also
invite so-called experts ‘against vaccination’, in fact a populist group. This
opens the space to expose such expertise as fake, and burdens a court with
the task to clearly communicate that message. In addition, there is doctrine
to rely on, which is why the Covid emergency measure rulings emphasise
the government’s margin of appreciation on all levels of proportionality, and
insist on the state’s responsibility to install reliable producers and collectors of
scientific knowledge. It is for others to say whether the courts do enough
to facilitate and communicate the facts. But it shows that there is work to do.
Another example is migration.We all know that people move across borders,
which also means migration to Europe, and to Britain. But why people move,
23

--- Page 23 ---
how and where to is far from clear. To the contrary, migration is extremely
controversial and,again,emotionally charged,polarising and polarised,rife with
disinformation and misinformation, manipulated stories and lies. This is also
no coincidence, because the new totalitarians use migration to trigger hate
and destabilise democracies. What then is the role of courts? Again, idealism is
tempting,and there is a tradition in migration law to rely on assumptions,ideals
and ideas, namely ‘the refugee’ (what is the image in your head?), or ‘national
identity’and ‘the people’,or in German,the ‘Volk’. The effect is exclusion,as
injustice. Instead, courts should clarify what really matters, and rely on general
facts.
Finally, in a ruling on sanctions in social security law, the German Court ap-
plied a sliding scheme of epistemological obligations, depending on the weight
of the intrusion on fundamental rights, and even highlighted the obligation to
rely on plausible findings in the headnotes. Overall,facts may be more or less
prognostic in character,based on different sources of information,with more or
less effort made by the state to keep them up to date. Note that academic ex-
pertise regarding all these topics, be it climate, Covid, gender, migration, or the
welfare state,are targeted by the new totalitarians,denounced and dismissed for
a reason, to run things without limits or control. Therefore, courts are needed,
as facilitators,curators and communicators of facts,to counter these threats,not
least, to democracy and justice.
Now some may object: If we assign this role to facilitate, curate, expose and
communicate facts to courts to counter the anti-factual challenge – doesn’t it
again intensify judicial review, for what is often called ‘activist’ jurisprudence
charged with depoliticising effects, an additional reason to reject (new) con-
stitutionalism? Is judicial review then, finally, a ‘threat to democracy’? And
should courts defer in epistemological matters as well?
I think it is not, and courts should not and cannot reasonably defer in such
matters. Here too, the call for deference is often a key element in attempts to
‘reform’ but in fact undo the rule of law. The concern seems plausible, but it
throws the baby out with the bathwater.
Certainly,courts must not and cannot replace politics.They are reactive insti-
tutions, equipped only with words, and democracy means, and requires, room
for politics, which courts are called upon not to replace but to protect. The
‘expertise obstacle’ in fact delineates judicial scrutiny, and ‘even if courts have
the legitimacy to review crisis measures, the expertise obstacle refrains them
24

--- Page 24 ---
from using that room’. But room for politics is not an unlimited space for
the anti-factual totalitarian crusade, if it is still a democracy. As long as democ-
racy deserves the label, courts must therefore, and do in fact, leave room for
politics in that they defer.But deference is not a general habit or an attitude but
an elaborate and very nuanced doctrine. It takes the separation and interde-
pendency of powers seriously, their respective institutional design, their relative
institutional competencies, in relation to what is at stake. This results in various
degrees of leeway for parliament and,formally or de facto,government,and for
the administration. But it is no carte blanche.
Think of security matters,the secret service,diplomacy and international re-
lations,military strategy and war.Certainly,there is leeway,and there are margins
of appreciation.But no carte blanche.Government or politicians have no man-
date to lie, mislead, or manipulate. However, facing the anti-factual challenge,
there is a need to reconsider the scope and intensity of review. For a long time,
human rights courts as well as constitutional courts gave governments the ben-
efit of the doubt. But with new totalitarians on the rise dressing as democrats,
with democrats copying their populism, with fake facts all over the place, poli-
cies cannot be taken at face value, but courts need to check. There is no longer
reason to accept what governments tell courts. Again, and in many countries,
governments called it ‘reforming the courts’ when they destroyed or captured
these institutions; Russia says ‘military operation’ to cover a brutal war, and
there is more.Thus,we have no reason to simply believe what governments say.
Courts must check what are presented as facts. In doing so, the role of courts is
not only to ‘find’ the facts, but also to expose what is fake.
As usual,sweeping critique is not helpful,details matter to inform degrees of
deference. Because of the counter-majoritarian difficulty, in that courts are not
to second guess the complicated balancing of politics, acts of parliament shall
not be easily crushed. In addition, the executive may be the institution well
prepared to collect and assess expertise. But the role of courts is to check on
them,as is widely accepted in administrative law, using plausibility,procedural
or substantive review of general facts in order to do so.Again,this needs to
25

--- Page 25 ---
be communicated carefully. Court decisions are still about the law, but today
they are also epistemological interventions to counter the populist campaigns
and new totalitarians.
Legal education
Are judges fit to do that? What do judges know about facts and truth,and about
fake facts and manipulation? What should they know? Here, legal education
matters. If ever you needed an argument: The knowledge crisis is why law
schools are,at best,not just training camps for lawyers,but engage in legal studies
beyond, but not without, doctrine, and are interdisciplinary as well. Facing the
anti-factual challenge, legal education has to make sure that future lawyers and
judges, are up to these new callings. We need to know more about judicial
heuristics, and we need to train people to properly deal with general facts.
When truth is precarious, when facts are confusing, when data may be fake
and knowledge is manipulated, all intensified by artificial intelligence (AI) –
to apply the law and to judge means to navigate through this sea. In court,
knowledge must be,as Nicola Lacey called it,coordinated. We must not only
take rights,but we must take facts seriously,to quote Twining. Future lawyers
should learn how to facilitate, navigate, expose and communicate what can be
accepted as facts, and what must be rejected as flawed, false, misleading.
As far as I know, knowledge, or truth, is not yet a regular course in legal
education.There are classes on evidence,but they are not concerned with gen-
eral facts that matter to democracy. Here, socio-legal studies help, including
the critical approaches developed in gender studies, queer studies, critical race
studies and more, as well as criminology beyond forensic studies. If trained
more broadly, judges would understand that biological essentialism is on the
rise again, and why this happens, and that it hurts people. They would be able
to identify established expertise, and refuse scandalising anecdotes on safety in
‘real women’s spaces’,and the reduction of a multifaceted experience to a binary
choice of either trans or women’s rights, a false ideological juxtaposition. Simi-
larly,judges would be able to navigate what we know about migration,uncover
26

--- Page 26 ---
assumptions as bias, expose lies, and communicate what we need to know to
design policies not violating human rights. The same is needed to judge claims
around climate change, or security measures, or social rights. Lawyers need to
be epistemologically fit. It is only then that supreme, constitutional and human
rights courts can properly do their job, to fight the anti-factual challenge.
WHAT TO DO
The anti-factual challenge threatens democracy,and the rule of law.It is a com-
ponent of new totalitarian strategies that hurt people.As much as legitimacy in
law and democracy depend on communicative reason, as a consensus on truth,
it is a prime target,next to academic and research institutions,or quality media.
The latter in fact need the former to fight back. Which is what we all need to
do.
The young Iranian, Noureen Akhtar, in pondering the question of what is
Justice in a Post-Truth World, described Justitia as no longer being the blind-
folded figure standing fiercely over a pair of scales.Rather,Justice is now trying
to see through the digital smog of deceptions masked as facts and noise mas-
querading as knowledge.She says:‘Legal systems,too,are vulnerable.It was once
the courts anchored in practice and precedent, but now it is courts having to
deal with deep fakes, viral disinformation, and populist pressure’. But she also
added that ‘Justice is not dead; it is growing as a way, changing as life does’.
Therefore, ‘the world of post-truth calls for a more explicit and reflexive kind
of justice.’ It must ‘once again become a mode of listening, of bearing witness,
of reconstructing trust brick by fragile brick.’ Trust matters, not blind,but
curated, and cared for. Therefore, Noureen Akhtar said, we must ‘insist on the
possibility of understanding, and to affirm the dignity of truth in the face of its
erasure.’ ‘For even when truth is obscured, its pursuit remains the most radical
gesture of hope.’
27
