
--- Page 1 ---
The future market potential of 3D printing will rest on the dissemination of Computer 
Aided Design (CAD) files. Without clear instructions from a CAD file, a 3D printer 
will not function. In fact, “a 3D printer without an attached computer and a good 
design file is as useless as an iPod without music”. The importance of CAD-based 
design files, therefore, cannot be underestimated. Drawing on UK and EU copyright 
laws and their application to 3D printing and CAD files, this paper will, first, question 
whether CAD files can be protected by copyright law before considering the 
copyright implications thrown up by the modification of CAD files as a result of 
scanning and the use of online tools. Highlighting some of the challenges for rights 
holders and users existent in the present law the paper advocates new business models 
over a premature call for stringent intellectual property laws before concluding with 
some recommendations for the future. 
online tools; business models 
According to Lipson and Kurman, ‘[i]n a 3D printed future world, people will make 
what they need when and where they need it.’ Furthermore, as 3D printing opens up 
new frontiers, ‘[m]anufacturing and business as usual will be disrupted as regular 
people gain access to power tools of design and production.’ With this, it is clear that 
3D printing is expected to bring both challenges and opportunities and its significant 
growth in the consumer market has been reflected in Gartner’s 2014 Hype Cycle . 
1

--- Page 2 ---
The recent introduction of home-based 3D printing has further enabled consumers to 
engage in the manufacture of products using digital data bought or ‘shared’ online 
circumventing much of the traditional manufacturing and retail value chain . As 
such, 3D printing provides the potential for designing, sharing and reproducing 
physical objects. Recognising this potential, Lipson and Kurman predict that 
‘intellectual property law will be brought to its knees’.
However, the position in relation to the technology as well as intellectual property 
laws remains under-developed. For example, the design barriers, such as the lack of a 
straight-forward ‘print’ button for 3D printing, means that at present 3D printing 
continues to be largely reserved for those with technical ability and technical 
knowledge. However the bigger obstacle to the ‘3D printing evolution’ is that few 
consumers or designers have the ability to operate the software, which is used to 
render objects and turn them into files that can be printed. “A lot of people are 3D 
printing other people’s designs, but they can’t yet model their own” . This is further 
exacerbated by access to online sharing platforms , which facilitate the creation and 
dissemination of 3D object designs or Computer-Aided Design (CAD) files for 
download and printing . 
2

--- Page 3 ---
This paper will set out a brief introduction to 3D printing before turning to consider 
the copyright implications surrounding design files through the use of CAD software. 
Design object files (also referred to as CAD-based design files in the context of this 
paper) which provides the ability to create, share and disseminate 3D designs for 
download and printing are highly relevant in the 3D printing landscape. Without the 
CAD file, or 3D design, a 3D printed product will not come into being. Furthermore, 
in considering 3D models and 3D designs, it is apparent that online tools (or “apps” as 
they are known) play a significant role amongst users in designing and re-designing 
the models. This is of particular importance once again to 3D designs or CAD files 
the transformation or modification of which raises interesting copyright issues. 
For example, can a CAD file be protected under copyright law? Does it qualify as a 
literary work? Where the file is modified by other users – either by scanning or 
through the use of online tools – what are the implications for copyright and in 
particular, originality? Therefore, whilst 3D printing raises a variety of issues relating 
to Intellectual Property Rights , this paper will focus particularly on the implications 
for copyright law. 
A consideration of these issues amongst others, which arise from the use and access
to online platforms and CAD files shared therein, requires an exploration of the 
implications for copyright law. As such, this paper will consider the application of 
UK and EU copyright law to 3D printing before concluding with some thoughts for 
the future. 
3

--- Page 4 ---
Computers play a critical role in the 3D printing process. Without instructions from a 
computer, a 3D printer simply will not work. The functioning of a 3D printer 
therefore depends on it being ‘fed’ a well-designed electronic design file, which could 
be a CAD file, that tells it where to place the raw material. In fact, “a 3D printer 
without an attached computer and a good design file is as useless as an iPod without 
music” . 
Therefore, by using software programs such as CAD, which has the ability to send 
descriptions of each individual layer to a 3D printer, a three-dimensional object is 
created, layer-by-layer. This process of creating a product layer-by-layer led to the 
adoption of the term ‘additive layer manufacturing’ or ‘additive manufacturing’. It 
should however be noted that this direct approach to part production was initially 
called ‘Rapid Manufacturing’, but was later standardised by the American Society for 
Testing and Materials as ‘Additive Manufacturing’ (AM) . As the term AM failed to 
gain popularity the term 3D printing has been adopted widely amongst the media and 
the general public . 
The end products can be printed in many ways, depending on the technology that is 
used. These include, amongst others, Fused Deposition Modelling (FDM), Selective 
Laser Sintering (SLS), Electronic Beam Melting (EBM) and Polyjet Matrix . 
Amongst these patented technologies are two open-source initiatives: RepRap and 
Fab@Home. Replicating Rapid Prototype (RepRap), the invention of Bath University 
academic Dr. Adrian Bowyer was the first low-cost open-source 3D printing initiative
to be developed in the UK . Fab@Home, an American initiative, allows users to 
build 3D printers themselves using ‘online blueprints’ and a kit of components . 
4

--- Page 5 ---
However, the concept of 3D printing can be traced back to the 1970’s to an article 
written almost 40 years ago, on 3 October 1974, by David Jones . This was followed 
by a patent granted in 1977 to American Wyn Kelly Swainson , for the same idea 
described by Jones, although Swainson had filed the patent in 1971 before Jones’ 
article was published. Ultimately, it was American Charles Hull who led the way for 
the launch of the first commercial 3D printer in 1988 made possible by a patent 
granted in March 1986 for an ‘Apparatus for Production of Three-Dimensional 
Objects by Stereolithography’ . 
Since then, the technology has continued to develop significantly and has led to the 
creation of various end products in the medical field, transport industry, food industry, 
the toy and hobby industry and the fashion and cosmetic industry to name a few . It 
has also opened up doors to controversy following developments such as the 3D 
printed gun . However, it is clear that any disadvantages of this technology are 
outweighed by the many advantages. Lipson and Kurman outline ten significant 
advantages of the technology as perceived by businesses, consumers and the general 
public. These include, the freedom from manufacturing complexity; freedom of 
variety; easy assembly; ability to print-on-demand taking away the lead-time; 
unlimited design space; lack of need for high level manufacturing skills (as mentioned 
above a 3D printer receives its guidance from a CAD design file); compact, portable 
manufacturing; generation of less waste by-product; providing for infinite shades of 
materials; and the ability to create precise physical replication . 
5

--- Page 6 ---
The final advantage of creating precise physical replicas can also be seen as a 
disadvantage in the context of Intellectual Property laws. The next part of this paper 
will consider the challenges for copyright law as a result of 3D printing, particularly 
from the point of view of software such as CAD and the proliferation of online tools 
provided by various online platforms. 
Every object produced by a 3D printer begins its design process with a CAD based 
digital object design file. “The object design file is similar to the architectural 
blueprints for a building or the sewing pattern for a dress – it is a digital 3D model 
which the printer uses to build the object using the specifications defined in the 
design” . The interesting question to consider in this regard is, how a user accesses a 
CAD-based design file. There are several ways in which these files can be obtained, 
namely: 
(1) An individual creates and initiates an object design file using CAD or similar 
software specially designed for creating 3D object designs for 3D printing (scenario 
one); 
(2) By looking through online repositories/platforms which provide online design 
files created by others which can be modified (scenario two); and/or 
(3) By scanning the object with a laser scanner (scenario three).
Each of these options give rise to Intellectual Property implications and in the present 
context copyright implications – whether it is a original CAD file; one obtained from 
online platforms or one which has been generated by scanning an object. The 
following discussion will consider issues arising from the three scenarios mentioned 
above. In particular the discussion below will consider whether a CAD file is capable 
of being protected as a copyright work and if so, the implications it presents as a 
result of scanning and modifying the CAD files utilising the software tools (or 
“apps”) made available on online platforms. 
6

--- Page 7 ---
Where creators initiate and design an ‘original’ 3D model or 3D design for 
downloading and printing, the Intellectual Property (hereinafter IP) and particularly 
copyright should rest with the creator in accordance with copyright law . This begs 
the question whether such CAD files are capable of being protected by copyright as a 
literary work. Matt Simon argues that even if it is determined that 3D design files are 
capable of being protected by copyright for example, issues arise when considering 
items such as food, living cells, and organs for which 3D printing is used . He 
opines that copyright protection “cannot exist for … scientific progress because that is 
protected solely by patent law” . This view is further supported in the USA by case 
law and leading academic commentators. In the US case of Oracle v Google, Judge 
William Alsup dismissed Oracle’s copyright claim in its entirety after a detailed 
review of US jurisprudence of software copyright. He held that there was no 
infringement by Google as “copyright law does not confer ownership over any and all 
ways to implement a function or specification, no matter how creative the copyrighted 
implementation or specification may be” . 
Professor Nimmer, who observes that recipes are copyrightable also “seems doubtful 
because the content of recipes are clearly dictated by functional considerations and 
therefore may be said to lack the required element of originality, even though the 
7

--- Page 8 ---
combination of ingredients contained in the recipes may be original in a non-
copyright sense” . 
Rideout takes a different view and asserts that a CAD based digital object design file 
resembles computer software as opposed to stating that it is computer software 
(emphasis added). Rideout reasons that CAD files will not be considered as 
copyrightable software in the USA: 
What differentiates 3D CAD files from other computer programs is that the 
3D CAD files are basically just a triangular representation of a 3D object. 
The files themselves do not control how 3D printers operate … they merely 
serve as more of a blueprint for software to utilize . 
As such, Rideout does not consider a 3D design file to be a literary work and states 
that a CAD file will more likely be considered under “pictorial, graphic, and 
sculptural works” including “technical drawings, diagrams and models” . 
Interestingly, such examples would fall under the category of artistic works under UK 
copyright law . However before applying the law to 3D object design files or CAD 
files, it will be useful to consider the meaning of a computer program as defined in the 
EU and UK. 
8

--- Page 9 ---
The Recital of the EU Software Directive provides a definition of computer programs 
as follows: 
For the purpose of this Directive, the term “computer program” shall include 
programs in any form including those, which are incorporated into hardware. 
This term also includes preparatory design work leading to the development 
of a computer program provided that the nature of the preparatory work is 
such that a computer program can result from it at a later stage . 
An analysis of the above quote establishes that “the protection is … bound to the 
program code and to the functions that enable the computer to perform its task. This 
implies that there is no protection for elements without such functions (i.e. graphical 
user interface (GUI), or “mere data”) and which are not reflected in the code (i.e. 
functionality itself is not protected, since there could be a different code that may be 
able to produce the same function)” . In other words, copyright protection will 
attach to the expression of the computer code and will not extend to the functionality 
of the software (emphasis added).
At the same time, Court of Justice of the European Union (CJEU) cases, notably, 
concluded that a “copyright work”, should demonstrate the “own intellectual creation 
of its author” thereby placing the emphasis on the right form of authorial input as 
opposed to the category of copyright works. 
9

--- Page 10 ---
Applying the Software Directive and cases such as Infopaq, the CJEU considered the 
status of computer programs in Bezpečnostní and SAS Institute Inc., v World 
Programming Ltd., . In Bezpečnostní, CJEU stated, following the principles 
expressed in Infopaq that notwithstanding the position under the Software Directive, 
the ordinary law of copyright could protect the graphic user interface of a computer 
program . In SAS Institute Inc., the CJEU concluded (unsurprisingly) that 
functionality, language and data file formats are not protected by copyright under the 
Software Directive since they did not constitute forms of expression. However, the 
Court suggested that the programming language and data file formats “might be 
protected, as works, by copyright under [the Copyright] Directive … if they are their 
author’s own intellectual creation” clearly drawing on the decision of 
Bezpečnostní . 
However, its consideration in the UK High Court and Court of Appeal highlighted the 
issues with the CJEU decision. For example, the decision does not answer the 
question as to whether copyright protection might extend to underlying elements of 
the program, such as its programming languages and the format of data files, under 
the Copyright Directive. Lewison LJ in the Court of Appeal stated that the language 
used by the CJEU was at times, “disappointingly compressed, if not obscure” . 
Simply, the situation remains unclear and begs the question whether CAD files can be 
copyright protected according to the CJEU case law and UK law. 
10

--- Page 11 ---
According to Toft, the CJEU case law gives “developers the freedom to reproduce the 
functionality of software in the knowledge they cannot be pursued for copyright 
infringement … the same cannot be said for the initial software developer” . 
In the UK, the Copyright, Designs and Patents Act 1988 (as amended) states that a 
computer program and its embedded data for example is recognised as a literary work 
under copyright law . Applying the current law to the 3D printing context, it can be 
established that a computer program encompasses a CAD-based object design file 
within its definition and is therefore capable of copyright protection in the UK as a 
literary work. Bradshaw et al and Mendis applying the law to object design files 
clarify that a CAD file is an original work of authorship, which may be protected by 
literary copyright in the same manner as other types of computer software. Further 
support for this view can be found in Autospin (Oil Seals) Ltd., v Beehive Spinning
where Laddie J makes reference, obiter dictum, to three-dimensional articles being 
designed by computers and states that “a literary work consisting of computer code 
represents the three dimensional article” . 
It is also interesting to consider whether 3D models, which come into being from a 
CAD-based file, infringe the artistic copyright of that object design file. The question 
can be considered from the perspective of making of a 3D copy of a 2D object and 
vice-versa . A number of legal decisions in the UK have attempted to clarify artistic 
11

--- Page 12 ---
works and in particular the meaning of ‘sculpture’ – which includes 3D works such 
as models, with Lucasfilm v Ainsworth being the most recent decision to attempt 
clarification. The case was illustrative of the point that a 3D object which comes into 
being from a design document or CAD file does not infringe copyright if the CAD-
based file or model embodying a design is used to create an object for anything other 
than an artistic work (emphasis added). In Lucasfilm, the Supreme Court, agreeing 
with the Court of Appeal’s decision in 2009 held in favour of the defendant, Andrew 
Ainsworth, claiming that the Star Wars white helmets were ‘utilitarian’ as opposed to 
being a work of sculpture . 
This case is reflective of the future challenges, which manufacturers of 3D objects 
could face in the UK. In accordance with the case it appears that copyright protection 
for a sculpture (or work of artistic craftsmanship) is limited to objects created 
principally for their artistic merit – i.e. the fine arts. 
However, as mentioned above, recent developments from the CJEU—Infopaq 
GmbH and most recently Football Dataco Ltd v Yahoo! UK Ltd —arguably point to 
the fact that the category of copyright works is less important; rather the emphasis is 
on the right form of authorial input , the cases concluding that a “copyright work”, 
should demonstrate the “own intellectual creation of its author”. 
12

--- Page 13 ---
Estelle Derclaye states that the requirement for a work to be the intellectual creation 
of its author in order to be capable of copyright protection changes the current UK test 
of sufficient skill, judgement, labour and capital that still applies to all works except 
databases and computer programs . In other words, it also means that establishing 
own intellectual creation in relation to computer programs and databases means that 
books, films, paintings and architecture do not carry a consistent definition of what is 
meant by a ‘copyright work’ . 
This requirement may appear on the face of it a more onerous test when determining 
whether to confer copyright protection on 3D digital models of physical objects. 
However, subsequent case law illustrates that that the test has been used successfully 
in protecting photographs, for example. 
In the case of Painer it was held that portrait photographs attracted copyright 
protection. The Court stated that a portrait photograph could be protected by 
copyright if such a photograph “is an intellectual creation of the author reflecting his 
personality and expressing his free and creative choice in the production of that 
photograph” . Furthermore, “its protection is not inferior to that enjoyed by any 
other work, including photographic works” . Applying the same reasoning to 3D 
digital files and models, where a sufficient amount of creative choices have to be 
made in designing the CAD-based file, it can be argued that there is no reason why 
such digital models should, as a rule, fail to meet the requirements. 
In concluding this part of the discussion and in reflecting on the status of a CAD-
based object design file, from the USA/UK perspective, it is clear that there is a lack 
of consistency and clarity in relation to their protection under copyright law. Whilst 
13

--- Page 14 ---
USA commentators take the view that a CAD file is incapable of being protected as a 
literary work, UK commentators have taken the opposite view, which has been 
supported UK case law, whilst CJEU has left questions unanswered. However, to be 
protected as a copyright work, a CAD file will also have to demonstrate sufficient 
originality. Where a 3D digital model is not initiated by the creator, but instead is 
created from scanning an existing object or modifying an existing object found on an 
online platform, then meeting the originality requirement under copyright law will be 
challenging as discussed below. 
Online platforms dedicated to the dissemination and sharing of 3D designs offer 
online tools (or “apps” as they are known) such as Meshmixer , 123D Catch , 
MakerBot Customizer , and Workbench for users to create, edit, upload, download, 
remix and share 3D designs. In the present context, the discussion will focus on 
whether the modification of design files made possible by these online tools or 
through scanning infringes the copyright of the existing CAD-based design files, 
thereby not meeting the originality threshold. 
‘Originality’ is not defined in the Copyright, Designs and Patents Act (as amended).
However, the meaning of ‘originality’ has been developed in a line of UK cases 
ranging from the Graves’ Case to Walter v Lane , Interlego AG v Tyco Industries 
14

--- Page 15 ---
Sawkins v Hyperion Ltd amongst others.
In Interlego v Tyco, the Court was clear in concluding that the plaintiff’s engineering 
drawings of its interlocking toy bricks, re-drawn from earlier design drawings with a 
number of minor alterations, did not amount to copyright protection . Lord Oliver 
further demonstrated the English Courts’ approach to acts of copying even where the 
copying may have involved much skill, labour and judgement. 
Take the simplest case of artistic copyright, a painting or photograph. It takes 
great skill, judgement and labour to produce a good copy by painting or to 
produce an enlarged photograph from a positive print, but no one would 
reasonably contend that the copy painting or enlargement was an ‘original’ 
artistic work in which the copier is entitled to claim copyright. Skill, labour 
or judgement merely in the process of copying cannot confer originality” . 
On the point of ‘modified Lego designs’ Lord Oliver stated that the copying should 
involve: 
… some element of material alteration or embellishment which suffices to 
make the totality of the work an original work ... even a relatively small 
alteration of addition qualitatively may, if material, suffice or convert that 
which was substantially copied from an earlier work into an original work... 
But copying, per se, however much skill or labour may be devoted to the 
process, cannot make an original work . 
A reading of Lord Oliver’s dictum implies that it is the extent of the change, which 
will qualify the work as an original work thereby drawing a new copyright. 
15

--- Page 16 ---
Furthermore, the change should be ‘material’. However, as Ong opines, it is 
important to note that the Privy Council’s decision in Interlego v   Tyco was made in 
“response to a narrow factual context” . The decision was based on a very specific 
policy concern – that copyright law should not be used as a vehicle to create fresh 
intellectual property rights over commercial products after the expiry of patent and 
design rights, which had previously subsisted in the same subject matter . 
This case suggests that where a 3D digital model faithfully reproduces a copyright 
work, like a sculpture for example, then the 3D digital model will not be sufficiently 
original to constitute a copyright work even where copyright in the original work has 
expired. However, cases such as Walter v Lane have held that verbatim short hand 
reports of a speech, which have later been transcribed, corrected, revised and 
punctuated carries the necessary skill, labour and judgement required for copyright. 
The House of Lords in this case adopted the view that a speech and a report of a 
speech are two different things. 
Similarly, where an object design file or model is created from a scan or where the 
file has been transformed through the use of online tools, does the processing of the 
scanned data and the ‘cleaning up’ required to re-create and reverse-engineer the scan, 
attract new copyright as a result of the skill, labour, effort and judgement expended in 
the scanning and reverse-engineering process? Some guidance for this question can 
be drawn from Dietz who states that there must be “a relation of creation between the 
work and the author whatever this act of creation (sometimes only presentation) 
means” . 
16

--- Page 17 ---
In considering whether a scanned 3D digital model of an artistic work is capable of 
being protected by copyright, it must first be pointed out that scanning a work, which 
is in copyright constitutes copying requiring permission to avoid infringement. 
However, the fact that permission is required to scan the object and create the 3D 
digital model does not preclude the model from copyright protection. 
Li et al reflecting on their study into 3D printing chocolate states that commonplace 
artistic techniques and skills are not generally protected by copyright; so, if these are 
the elements that are copied, there will be no infringement. However, they reason that 
what is important is the basis of copyright, not the medium in which a product is 
being 3D printed . In other words, if a ‘substantial part’ has been taken from another 
creator in designing a 3D model, then “it makes no difference that a different medium 
is used (once the object has been scanned), or that the infringing work is derived 
indirectly from the original work, such as where an intermediary has given verbal 
instructions which are used by a third party to recreate the work” . As Li et al go on 
to state, “it will continue to be an infringement if the size changes , dimensions are 
altered ; elements of the original work are left out or bits added ”. 
Thus making an exact replica of a work that is in copyright or taking a substantial 
part, will infringe copyright. However, 3D printing, allows the recreation and 
restoration of ancient works, which can now be scanned, reverse-engineered and 
printed thereby creating a ‘new’ work. This leads to the following question: what is 
17

--- Page 18 ---
the copyright position where the scanning involves the restoration and reconstitution 
of out-of-copyright works or even works in copyright? The case of Sawkins v 
Hyperion Records provides some direction here. For example, the performance 
score of Lalande’s music in Sawkins was considered an original work irrespective of 
the fact that it was derived from the original music in which copyright had expired 
(emphasis added). However, the performance score would still have been original if 
it had been created when Lalande’s original music was still in copyright . 
The Supreme Court of Israel in Dead Sea Scrolls case came to a similar ruling to 
that of Sawkins and sheds further light on the issue. The Court held that Professor 
Qimron’s reconstitution of the 2000-year old Dead Sea Scrolls was an original work 
for purposes of copyright. Qimron therefore had copyright in the deciphered text as a 
literary work in the same way Sawkins had a musical copyright in the performing 
editions. 
Ong supports the view that copyright can subsist in recreative works, which have 
been scanned from out-of-copyright works on the basis that skill and judgement has 
been exercised in the recreation of such works. He argues that copyright should not 
only ‘incentivise’ works, which are ‘materially altered’ from the pre-existing work. 
He states that it could be in the public interest for authors to make identical replicas of 
antecedent works which are of major cultural significance or extremely inaccessible 
or both’ . 
This view is also supported by the cases of Antiquesportfolio and Painer . In 
Antiquesportfolio photographs of antiques were held to be copyright works taking into 
18

--- Page 19 ---
account the positioning of the object, the angle at which it is taken, the lighting and 
the focus which culminated in exhibiting particular qualities including the colour, 
features and details of the items. The court stated that such elements could all be 
matters of aesthetic or even commercial judgement, albeit in most cases at a very 
basic level but sufficient to demonstrate a degree of skill for copyright to exist in the 
photographs . 
Applying the above-discussed cases to scanned 3D models it can be deduced that such 
objects will draw a new copyright on the basis of the skill, effort and judgement, 
which will be expended in the reverse-engineering process. The application of the 
European ‘authorial input’ as seen in cases such as Infopaq discussed above, will 
however, require the personal touch of the creator (rather than being verbatim or a 
replica) before it can attract new copyright. As such, it could be argued that by 
making creative choices such as selecting particular views of the physical object when 
a 3D digital model is created through scanning an object is sufficient to make the 3D 
digital model an “intellectual creation of the author reflecting his personality and 
expressing his free and creative choice” in its production. 
Yet, it is clear that where a work is ‘copied’ without authorisation it will constitute an 
infringement of copyright. As Bradshaw, Bowyer and Haufe point out “trafficking in 
copies of a manufacturers’ official 3DPDFs (3D object design files) (sic) for spare 
parts would be illegitimate” . This highlights the issues, which can surface from the 
sharing of 3D design files on online platforms, which can be modified numerous 
times by using online tools such as Meshmixer, MakerBotDigitizer (for purposes of 
scanning) for example. 
The increase in scanning devices coupled with the low threshold needed for copyright 
to subsist as discussed could prove problematic in the 3D printing world for those 
wanting to protect their IP. A further problem also arises from the perspective of the 
19

--- Page 20 ---
current law. Whilst on the one hand scanning 3D digital models representing (rare) 
artefacts or works appears to attract copyright status, it is also clear that 3D digital 
models of works of artistic craftsmanship manufactured on an industrial scale 
(functional) will not . 
This paper considered whether a CAD-based design file can be copyright protected 
and established that whilst there is a lack of support for copyright protection in USA, 
a CAD-based design file may be protected by copyright in the UK. At the same time, 
recent CJEU cases have left a number of questions unanswered. However, the 
territorial nature of copyright law coupled with the international nature of online 
platforms and CAD-based design files shared therein could lead to uncertainty and 
complex issues in the future. Therefore there has to be clearer guidance about the 
status of CAD-based design files. 
The second part of the paper deliberated the implications for copyright law, as a result 
of scanning and reverse engineering through the use of online tools. This was 
considered by drawing on a line of decisions from Walter v. Lane to Interlego AG v 
Tyco Industries Inc. and Others, Antiquesportfolio.com Plc v Rodney Fitch & Co. 
Ltd., Sawkins v Hyperion Ltd., and Eisenmann v Qimron. The paper suggested that 
copyright can subsist in scanned objects provided there is skill, labour, judgement and 
effort in re-creating those objects or by making creative choices such as selecting 
particular views of the physical object thereby reflecting the creator’s personality and 
expressing his free and creative choices as required by European case law. However, 
the paper also outlined that 3D digital models of works of artistic craftsmanship 
manufactured on an industrial scale (functional) will not attract copyright. Taking 
these points together, it does mean that copyright law as it stands today does not lend 
very much support to rights holders who may find it difficult to construct a case 
against those who scan and reverse engineer their products. With strong support for 
derivative works, but little support from the current law for rights holders, there will 
clearly have to be a re-consideration of the current copyright law. 
20

--- Page 21 ---
In the meantime, it is suggested that the future market potential of 3D printing will 
arise from the dissemination of CAD-based (or similar) design files. This author’s 
previous paper, Clone Wars: Episode I submitted that the future of the 3D printing 
industry lies in adapting to this technology and adopting new business models – and 
the same view is upheld in the present paper . Whilst a re-consideration of the law is 
necessary, it is important not to stifle this emerging technology by applying stringent 
IP laws in haste. 
As such, the author continues to uphold the option of creating a 3D parts store – a 
convenient one-stop-shop – similar to the iTunes model for buying digital object 
design files for 3D printing, for a small fee . These already exist in the form of 
“bureau services” ; however more specialised bureau services for different types of 
content (toy and hobby; spare parts etc.) could be the way forward. 
At the same time, it is important to avoid an Apple-iTunes type relationship, which 
could lock the manufacturer into an agreement, which will ultimately be managed by 
the distributor and their relationship with the customer. Bearing this drawback in 
mind, another option would be to license 3D files more widely . The reasoning here 
is that manufacturers may lack the expertise to sell their final product to consumers – 
for which they will need the help of stores. In this context if manufacturers are willing 
to license their 3D files, they will open doors to a range of intellectual property rights 
holders and a vast range of outlets. As time goes by more shops will provide for 3D 
designs, which can be printed in the convenience of one’s home. It is these kinds of 
stores that manufacturers should target. 
21

--- Page 22 ---
A further recommendation can be drawn from companies such as Authentise , 
FabSecure , Secure3D and ToyFabb . These companies allow for the secure 
streaming of 3D CAD files via an Application Programming Interface (API) and 
adopt a ‘pay-per-print’ business model . This model removes the need for a CAD 
file to be sent to the consumer ; instead the build instructions are sent directly to the 
printer, which, in turn, prints out the number of objects that have been purchased. It 
is an effective business model for manufacturers and designers who wish to protect 
their intellectual property whilst giving the consumers the option of printing toys and 
other smaller products at home . 
As 3D printing continues to grow, it will certainly give rise to challenges and 
opportunities as articulated by Lipson and Kurman . However, an impulsive or a 
reactive call for legislative and judicial action in the realm of 3D printing could stifle 
the public interest of “fostering creativity and innovation and the right of 
manufacturers and content creators to protect their livelihoods” . As such, and in 
looking to the future it will be sensible to adopt a symbiotic approach between 
developing the existing copyright law and embracing new business models. In other 
words, it will be prudent to pave the way for a legal and technological landscape that 
is better suited to tackling impending intellectual property issues arising from 3D 
printing. 
22
