
--- Page 1 ---
REVIEW
in Africa. Multiple national authorities are likely to 
be involved in decision-making, according to existing 
laws in place within each country for certain product 
classes. Requirements under the Cartagena Protocol 
on Biodiversity will be considered relevant in most 
countries, as may existing regulatory frameworks 
for conventional pesticide, medical, and biocontrol 
products. Experience suggests that standard regula-
tory processes, evidence requirements, and liability 
laws differ from country to country. Regional mecha-
nisms will be useful to address some of the important 
challenges.
Policy · Genetically modified
drive-modified 
mosquitoes 
(GDMMs) are being developed as possible new tools 
to prevent transmission of malaria and other mos-
quito-borne diseases. To date no GDMMs have yet 
undergone field testing. This early stage is an oppor-
tune time for developers, supporters, and possible 
users to begin to consider the potential regulatory 
requirements for eventual implementation of these 
technologies in national or regional public health 
programs, especially as some of the practical impli-
cations of these requirements may take considerable 
planning, time and coordination to address. Several 
currently unresolved regulatory questions pertinent 
to the implementation of GDMMs are examined, 
including: how the product will be defined; what 
the registration/approval process will be for placing 
new GDMM products on the market; how the poten-
tial for transboundary movement of GDMMs can be 
addressed; and what role might be played by exist-
ing multinational bodies and agreements in authori-
zation decisions. Regulation and policies applied for 
registration of other genetically modified organisms 
or other living mosquito products are assessed for rel-
evance to the use case of GDMMs to prevent malaria 
Gene drive-modified mosquitoes (GDMMs) hold 
promise as new tools for control and elimination of 
malaria and other mosquito-borne diseases (Eckhoff 
et al. 2016; North et al. 2020; Metchanun et al. 2021). 
The efficacy of GDMMs for preventing disease trans-
mission has not yet been demonstrated in field trials, 
and how best to conduct such trials remains the sub-
ject of considerable discussion. Yet it is not too early 
to begin considering the requirements for implemen-
tation (post-investigational use) of GDMMs as public 
health tools since these could have substantial ramifi-
cations for upstream research and development. As a 

--- Page 2 ---
is expected to be conducted under the authorization 
and oversight of national regulatory authorities and 
may involve authorities responsible for determining 
national or regional disease control priorities (World 
Health Organization 2021a). It is likely that there 
will be a period of post-implementation monitoring 
for safety, efficacy, and/or overall performance in the 
context of other malaria interventions.
Some have raised concerns that gene drive tech-
nologies pose novel risks for which current regulatory 
systems are unprepared (e.g., Oye et al. 2014; National 
Academies of Sciences, Engineering, and Medi-
cine 2016; Meghani and Kuzma 2018; Rabitz 2019; 
Dolezel 2020), although others suggest that current 
paradigms will be adequate with some improvements 
(e.g., EFSA Panel on Genetically Modified Organisms 
et al. 2020; Romeis et al 2020; Peterson and Rolston 
2022). Many of the concerns raised have broadly ref-
erenced the potential challenges for risk assessment, 
the need for inclusion of public input into regulatory 
decision-making, and the potential for movement 
of gene drive-modified mosquitoes across national 
boundaries. While issues such as risk assessment and 
stakeholder engagement continue to be addressed 
elsewhere (as reviewed in World Health Organization 
2021a), here we focus on a set of practical regulatory 
and policy questions related to the process of new 
product approval/registration of gene drive products 
for the specific use case of GDMMs for the control 
and elimination of malaria in Africa, an application 
for which research is rapidly advancing. However, the 
considerations raised here also may be germane to 
other proposed uses of gene drive technologies in pub-
lic health, agriculture and conservation.
Defining regulatory concepts
live genetically modified product with the potential to 
spread and persist in the environment, GDMMs aim to 
achieve area-wide control with characteristics that dif-
fer substantially from current insecticide-based mos-
quito control methods, raising some different regula-
tory and policy considerations for their development 
and implementation.
Gene drive promotes or favors the inheritance of 
certain genes from generation to generation (Alphey 
et al. 2020) and can be used to introduce new traits 
rapidly through an interbreeding population. In engi-
neered gene drive systems, the modification responsi-
ble for the new trait (the effector mechanism) might 
involve altering the sequence of existing genes, disa-
bling or excising an existing gene, or introducing new 
genes or genetic elements into the mosquito genome. 
These systems aim either to reduce the size of the 
population of vector mosquitoes by inhibiting their 
reproduction or survival (population suppression) or 
to modify the mosquitoes to make them less compe-
tent to transmit a pathogen (population replacement) 
(World Health Organization 2021a). Self-sustaining 
drives are intended to persist, passing the modifica-
tion on through subsequent generations indefinitely. 
Because of the properties of super-Mendelian inher-
itance, many self-sustaining drives are expected to 
spread widely within interbreeding mosquito popu-
lations. Self-limiting drive systems also have been 
described, which aim to impose some temporal 
restriction on the persistence of the modification so 
that it will eventually disappear from the target mos-
quito population. Another version under investiga-
tion, termed localizing or confined drive, intends to 
impose some spatial restriction on the spread of the 
modification through the target population (World 
Health Organization 2021a; Wang et al 2022).
According to the recommended development path-
way (World Health Organization 2021a), widespread 
implementation of GDMMs as public health tools 
would be considered only after adequate field testing 
demonstrates their safety for health and the environ-
ment as well as their potential to reduce vector mos-
quito populations and/or prevent disease transmission. 
Implementation will consist of producing GDMMs in 
an appropriately regulated facility and systematically 
releasing them into the environment where they will 
interbreed with wild mosquitoes, thus establishing the 
introduced trait in the local population of the target 
species for some period of time. Such implementation 
For commercial use, the product is considered to be 
the entity intended to be deployed. For GDMMs, this 
definition would translate to the live genetically mod-
ified mosquito products which, when released into the 
environment, are intended to pass the modification 
into the local population of compatible mosquitoes 
at a ratio greater than that expected based on Mende-
lian genetics (super-Mendelian inheritance). It is use-
ful to look to the regulation and registration of other 
genetically modified (GM) and/or live mosquito prod-
ucts for precedents that might apply to GDMMs. For 
GM crops, the transgenic organism traditionally has 

--- Page 3 ---
been treated as the regulated product, although in cer-
tain cases gene-edited products have been exempted
(Turnbull et al 2021). It has been proposed that the 
GDMM product be defined as the transgenic mosqui-
toes (adults or any other life stage) carrying the engi-
neered gene drive system (James et al. 2018). This is 
in agreement with inclusion of gene drive-modified 
organisms as living modified organisms (LMOs) 
under the Cartagena Protocol. With GDMMs, the 
transgenic construct is intended to spread to some 
extent, depending on characteristics of the gene drive 
system, to wild sexually compatible mosquito popula-
tions and species by interbreeding. For other live GM 
mosquitoes containing a heritable, albeit non-driving, 
construct, the product is considered to be those trans-
genic mosquitoes (adults or other life stage) that are 
produced under controlled conditions for purposeful 
release, Consistency would dictate extension of 
this same definition to GDMMs (Box 1).
As for other LMOs, such as GM crops, the regu-
lated article is expected to be the transformation 
event, involving stable integration of the transgenic 
construct leading to functional expression in the 
organism (OECD 2010), but regulatory approval may 
be requested and granted for the article and its derived 
products (which could include progeny in the same 
species or those resulting from sexual crossing into 
other genetic backgrounds). Thus, the same approved 
article may be used in more than one GDMM product 
if introgressed into that product.
The active ingredient for drugs has been defined 
by the US Food and Drug Administration (FDA) 
as any component responsible for the drug’s direct 
effect or a form that can bring about the intended 
effect or specified activity, whereas for pesticidal 
products the US Environmental Protection Agency 
(EPA) defines active ingredients as the chemicals 
(conventional, antimicrobial or biopesticidal) that 
act to control a pest. For live mosquito products, 
EPA has considered the active ingredient as the 
novel introduced and expressed component. For 
example, in a non-GM live mosquito product con-
taining intentionally introduced Wolbachia bacteria 
for population suppression, the EPA determined the 
active ingredient to be the introduced Wolbachia in 
the live Aedes albopictus mosquito. For a different 
Wolbachia-based technology, in which the bacteria 
are intended to be inherited by wild progeny of the 
modified mosquitoes in a self-sustaining popula-
tion replacement mechanism, the Australian Pes-
ticides and Veterinary Medicines Authority deter-
mined to regulate the Wolbachia as a substance 
that modifies the physiology of the mosquito (De 
Barro et al. 2011).

--- Page 4 ---
With relevance to GM crops, the US EPA has 
defined a plant-incorporated protectant as the 
"pesticidal substances produced and used in living 
plants and the genetic material necessary for the 
plant to produce the substance”. This definition 
of a pesticidal product has been further extended 
to genetically modified mosquitoes. Thus, in a GM 
mosquito product for population suppression, the 
active ingredient was determined by the EPA to be 
a protein with biopesticidal properties expressed 
in the released live mosquito product by the trans-
genic construct (See footnote 4). Specifically for 
Oxitec’s OX5034 Aedes aegypti, the tetracycline-
repressible transactivator protein variant (tTAV-
OX5034), which prevents female offspring from 
surviving, was recognized as the active ingredi-
ent, while the DsRed2-OX5034 marker protein was 
identified as an inert ingredient. In its risk assess-
ment, EPA also considered the vector pOX5034, 
which is the genetic material necessary for pro-
duction of these proteins in  vivo. According to 
these precedents, the active ingredient for GDMMs 
would be the expression product of the transgenic 
construct responsible for the intended effect in the 
released mosquitoes. For example, this may include 
expressed drive components (e.g. Cas9) and/or any 
cargo genes that contribute to the specified effect of 
the GDMM as described in the product definition. 
Introduced genetic material necessary for produc-
tion of the expressed proteins responsible for the 
intended effect also would be considered in the risk 
assessment for regulatory approval.
Regulatory pathways for GDMM products
Most countries where GDMMs might be used for 
control of mosquito-borne diseases are Parties to 
the Cartagena Protocol on Biosafety to the Conven-
tion on Biological Diversity (CPB) (Secretariat of 
the Convention on Biological Diversity 2000), an 
international agreement concerning safe handling, 
transport and use of LMOs. LMOs are described in 
the CPB (Article 3) as any living organism (any 
biological entity capable of transferring or replicating 
genetic material…) that possesses a novel combina-
tion of genetic material obtained through the use of 
modern biotechnology, a definition generally consid-
ered equivalent to GM organisms (GMOs). As men-
tioned above, it has been concluded that GDMMs 
meet the LMO definition) (See footnote 2). In coun-
tries that are Parties to the CPB, GDMMs proposed 
as public health tools therefore are expected to enter 
into the regulatory pathway under biosafety oversight 
as described in the CPB. Article ­19 instructs coun-
tries to designate a competent national authority to 
make decisions about importation and use of LMOs. 
The language of Article 19 allows for more than one 
competent authority and responsibility for biosafety 
approval may reside within a single national Ministry 
or be shared by a group of Ministries. In many coun-
tries, the National Biosafety Authority traditionally is 
housed within the Ministry of Environment, Ministry 
of Agriculture, or Ministry of Science. However, it 
is recognized that more than one competent author-
ity can be designated, depending on the nature of 
the LMOs and their anticipated use (Mackenzie et al 
2003), which suggests the possibility of a primary 
role for the Ministry of Health, Ministry of Science 
and Technology, or other relevant national authority 
for GDMMs. Therefore, multiple Ministries may be 
involved in biosafety decision-making and countries 
may use the National Biosafety Authority to facilitate 
interactions among them.
Some countries that are not CPB signatories 
have adopted a product-based regulatory process 
that does not distinguish a separate biosafety path-
way for GMOs. For example, Canada generally has 
a product-based regulatory system (Turnbull et  al 
2021). According to current guidance in the USA,
GDMMs intended to reduce populations of vector 
mosquitoes are to be regulated as pesticides by the 

--- Page 5 ---
EPA, whereas products intended to reduce the path-
ogen load within mosquitoes or prevent mosquito-
borne disease in humans will be regulated by the US 
FDA. Any GMO that could pose a plant or animal 
pest risk likely will be regulated by the US Depart-
ment of Agriculture. These regulatory authorities are 
not mutually exclusive and could overlap, thus result-
ing in oversight by more than one agency.
Precedents for new product approval at the national 
level
pathway for GM crops suggests that GDMM testing 
and approval could also involve multiple regulatory 
authorities that have jurisdiction over certain product 
categories, regardless of their GM status. For example, 
a dual pathway could include the National Biosafety 
Authority (for biosafety approval) and the national reg-
ulatory authority with a legal mandate most relevant to 
oversight of the product’s final use claim.
In addition to GM crops, a few countries now have 
some experience regulating GM (but not gene drive-
modified) insects, and efforts are underway in some 
other countries to adapt their biosafety regulatory 
processes to include oversight of GM insect products. 
Perhaps the regulatory experience most related to 
GDMMs to date has been with the self-limiting (herit-
able but non-driving) GM technologies developed for 
Ae. aegypti mosquitoes by Oxitec in Brazil. Brazil 
is a Party to the CPB, and generally has an enabling 
environment for new GM technologies. It presently 
is the only country where GM mosquitoes have been 
approved for commercial release. Oxitec received per-
mission for field testing of GM mosquitoes from CTN-
Bio (Comissão Técnica Nacional de Biossegurança, 
órgão do Governo Federal, based in the Ministry of 
Science, Technology, Innovations, and Communica-
tions), the technical entity responsible for conducting 
risk assessment of GMOs. CTNBio includes repre-
sentatives from multiple ministries and its safety 
decisions are binding on those ministries. Field 
Assuming that successful demonstration of efficacy and 
safety in field trials results in a decision to incorporate 
GDMM products into national or regional control plans, 
GDMM products will need to develop plans analogous 
to those for commercialization of other types of prod-
ucts. Although the testing phases preceding GDMM 
implementation will have been conducted under rel-
evant local and national regulatory oversight (discussed 
in World Health Organization 2021a), it is likely that 
this will have been accomplished under research or 
experimental use permits. However, national regulatory 
policies may involve a more expansive process for reg-
istration or final approval for placing a new product on 
the market for widespread and systematic use, as in the 
context of national disease control programs.
Current country regulatory authorities and regu-
lations in place for GMOs are likely to be considered 
for GDMMs. Regulatory processes for GMOs in most 
countries were originally developed for GM crops 
(Akinbo et  al. 2021; Quemada 2022). In most coun-
tries, GM crops must obtain biosafety approval from 
the national competent authority for GMOs, and then 
are subject to a national variety registration process, 
which applies to all new crop varieties. This registration 
process tests performance of the new varieties to decide 
whether they are suitable to be grown by farmers. The 
process involves a set of national performance trials, 
which are conducted in approved locations by national 
authorities located in the Ministry of Agriculture. 
However, a GM variety cannot enter such trials until 
biosafety approval is given to grow the GM crop in the 
presence of non-GM varieties. For GM crops, the com-
petent National Biosafety Authority might be housed 
in the Ministry of Agriculture or in another Ministry. 
Either way, the GM crop must follow a dual pathway 
involving approval by both biosafety and product per-
formance-based regulators. This existing regulatory 

--- Page 6 ---
testing subsequently demonstrated that sustained 
inundative releases substantially reduced the local Ae. 
aegypti populations at trial sites (Spinner et al 2022). 
CTNBio has granted biosafety approval for com-
mercial release of the second generation strain of the 
Oxitec Friendly™ mosquitoes as well as a similar 
fall armyworm product (Reavey et  al. 2022). Reg-
istration and enforcement of GM products in Bra-
zil is generally the purview of the relevant national 
agency(ies) dealing with health, environment, or agri-
culture (Velini et al. 2017; Andrade et al. 2018), with 
the Brazilian National Health Surveillance Agency 
(ANVISA) being the governmental body responsible 
under the Brazilian Biosafety Law of 2005 for the reg-
istration and commercial supervision of GMOs with 
direct implications for human health. However, the 
Oxitec GM mosquito products currently are being reg-
istered as pesticides with solely entomological claims 
and without any health claim. ANVISA does not have 
regulatory oversight over pesticides that are macro-
organisms, such as mosquitoes. Therefore, in this spe-
cific case, CTNBio was the only regulatory agency 
with jurisdiction and its biosafety approval was suffi-
cient for commercial release. CTNBio has published 
rules for commercial release and monitoring of GMOs 
in its Normative Resolution No. 32. Currently, 
Oxitec’s second generation GM Ae. aegypti mosquito 
product is being marketed for use by municipalities 
and also for direct-to-consumer sale in Brazil.
WHO recommendation (World Health Organization 
2020a), it is likely that FDA also would play a regu-
latory role even for those classified as pesticides, as 
it does for other human and animal health products 
(including clinical trials).
These examples indicate that the pathway to 
approval of new GDMM products for widespread 
release may well differ among countries according 
to the intended use of the product and the relevant 
legal mandates and precedents. Developers will be 
expected to specify the claims for the product and 
intended use, which will be important in determin-
ing the regulatory pathway, and supply the relevant 
evidence supporting the claims. National laws in the 
individual country then will determine specifics of 
jurisdiction according to the claims, such as relevant 
regulations and which Ministries and Agencies have 
oversight. For example, if classified as a medical 
product, final approval for commercialization might 
logically fall within the Ministry of Health. The Min-
istry of Health can be expected already to have been 
heavily involved in oversight of field trials for disease 
efficacy for a GDMM public health or human health 
claim (World Health Organization 2021a), and likely 
also to have participated in biosafety determination. 
But if the GDMM product is classified as a pesti-
cide, responsibility for final full approval might fall 
within the Ministries of Health, Agriculture and/or 
Environment depending upon national ­laws . Other 
types of live mosquito products, including SIT and 
Wolbachia-based population replacement, also have 
experienced different regulatory pathways in different 
countries.
Applicant responsibilities for new product approval
In the US, the EPA has issued experimental use 
permits to allow testing of Oxitec’s Friendly™ mos-
quitoes in Florida and more recently California.
The EPA also has registered the (non-GM) Wol-
bachia-based MosquitoMate population suppression 
product as a pesticide (See footnote 8). If a devel-
oper wishes to test the epidemiological efficacy of a 
GDMM product, which is a stated requirement for 
As the applicant, the GDMM developer, manufac-
turer or implementer will bear a number of respon-
sibilities. First, there will be costs associated with 
the process of full product approval. Individual 
countries may charge registration fees, and there may 
be consultant, legal, or other costs. This would be 
in addition to the costs of testing requirements for a 
new product. As with any product, an expectation to 

--- Page 7 ---
repeat field testing of GDMMs within each country as 
a pre-requisite to product registration could be time-
consuming and costly. Therefore, early consideration 
of evidence requirements and data portability, prior to 
field testing, will be important.
The GDMM developer or manufacturer also will 
be responsible for quality management of the prod-
uct. Rearing of GDMMs can be compared to manu-
facturing of other types of public health products. It 
is expected that, just as for other types of new prod-
ucts, those seeking to bring GDMMs to market will 
be required to provide sufficient information to allow 
the regulator(s) to determine whether the product is 
safe and effective for its proposed use and whether 
the manufacturing methods are adequate to preserve 
the product’s integrity across release lots/batches. 
Methods and criteria must be established in advance 
for determining whether a GDMM product is accept-
able for release (analogous to release specifications 
for other products ). Challenges can be anticipated 
in translating familiar requirements for medical or 
pesticide products (such as identity, potency, qual-
ity and purity) to GDMMs. Standards for GDMMs 
can be informed by practices common to other live 
insect products, however, such as those used in Ster-
ile Insect Technique (SIT) for which there exist 
long experience and documented processes (World 
Health Organization and International Atomic Energy 
Agency 2020; Dyck et al. 2021) as well as the newer 
GM and Wolbachia-based mosquito control methods 
(Table 1). Information that might be required within 
a regulatory dossier for regulatory evaluation and 
decision-making on GM biocontrol products has been 
suggested (Tonui et al. 2022).
It is likely that new product approval will require 
the applicant to propose a mechanism for monitor-
ing and reporting of adverse events (and possibly 
continued product efficacy) following releases. Such 
post-implementation monitoring may be particularly 
targeted to any risks identified as non-negligible in 
the risk assessment. The World Health Organization 
(WHO) has provided recommendations for post-
implementation monitoring and surveillance (World 
Health Organization 2021a), which could be custom-
ized to the particular GDMM product and use. The 
plan for adverse event reporting will need to specify 
what types of events will be monitored, at what fre-
quency and duration, as well as what types of actions 
could be anticipated as a response to address the 
adverse event.

--- Page 8 ---
(for example, GDMMs), as well as an Environmen-
tal and Social Impact Assessment, which examines 
the broader scope of potential health, environmental 
and socioeconomic impacts of a specific project 
(Rossouw et al. 2000; Connolly et al. 2022). Under 
these assessments, opportunities exist to consider 
potential impacts within a transboundary context.
Transboundary movement
GDMMs invoke some particularly complex questions 
with respect to product approval. One is the ques-
tion of whether a separate product approval would be 
required within each country that eventually might be 
affected by a product that intentionally or indepen-
dently crosses its national boundaries over time.
With regard to the ability of GDMMs to move 
autonomously across political boundaries or of the 
transgenic construct to move across borders via inter-
breeding, it is of interest to compare requirements 
for release of live insects for agricultural biocontrol 
as these also are able to disseminate autonomously. 
The usual procedure in that case is to submit a regu-
latory dossier only in the country where the release 
is proposed. Although it is recognized that biological 
control agents can cross borders, this is not normally 
a cause impacting the final decision of the country 
where the release is proposed. Indeed, transbound-
ary movement of the control agent may be considered 
beneficial by a receiving country dealing with simi-
lar unwanted pests. However, responsible national 
authorities are encouraged to communicate details 
of an intended release that may affect neighboring 
countries.
The fact that GDMMs are GMOs subject to 
requirements of the CPB in countries that are Par-
ties adds an extra dimension of complexity, how-
ever. Article 7 of the Protocol imposes a requirement 
for advanced informed agreement regarding “the 
first intentional transboundary movement of living 
A corollary to monitoring responsibility is liability. 
It will be important to understand whether, and if so 
how, the developer, registrant, manufacturer, and/or 
implementer is liable for any adverse effects result-
ing from the GDMM product. Currently, 52 countries, 
including several in Africa, are Parties to the Nagoya-
Kuala Lumpur Supplementary Protocol on Liability 
and Redress to the CPB. This protocol pertains to 
damage to the conservation and sustainable use of 
biodiversity, and requires that “response measures 
are taken in the event of damage resulting from living 
modified organisms, or where there is sufficient likeli-
hood that damage will result if timely response meas-
ures are not taken”. According to the predicted poten-
tial for a GDMM product to move across national 
boundaries, liability claims may extend to neighbors 
of the implementing country. Countries will incor-
porate responsibilities for these goals into their own 
laws individually and may interpret requirements of 
these terms, including the definition of damage, dif-
ferently. National liability laws will be an important 
determinant of receptivity to emerging technologies. 
For example, under fault liability those conduct-
ing the GDMM release would only be liable if they 
failed to conduct appropriate risk assessment to allow 
the government to make an informed decision about 
release, while the authorizing government would oth-
erwise bear the responsibility. However, strict liability 
could impose costs resulting from an adverse event on 
those conducting the release regardless of their good 
faith effort to comply with risk assessment obliga-
tions (Rabitz 2019). Thus, in planning for implemen-
tation, it will be important to determine how liability 
laws apply and how claims, including any related to 
transboundary movement, might be managed. Trial 
and/or product liability insurance, as offered for other 
types of products, is a consideration.
It is important to note that, in addition to the envi-
ronmental risk assessment of specific products that 
is a standard requirement of regulatory oversight 
according to the CPB and national laws, additional 
legal frameworks may apply in African countries. 
These include a Strategic Environmental Assess-
ment, which supports political and policy level deci-
sion-making regarding a general type of intervention 

--- Page 9 ---
modified organisms for intentional introduction into 
the environment of the Party of import”. Notifica-
tion under Article 17 concerning “an unintentional 
transboundary movement of a living modified organ-
ism  that is likely to have significant adverse effects 
on the conservation and sustainable use of biologi-
cal diversity, taking also into account risks to human 
health” also might be considered relevant under some 
circumstances.
In countries that have laws regulating GMOs, a 
GM product must be approved to be present in the 
country legally. This suggests certain possibilities 
according to precedent:
National requirements will need to be clarified as 
they may pertain to product distribution, for example 
in the case of intentional transport across national 
borders from a regional production facility to release 
sites in a neighboring country. Any particular require-
ments or restrictions on international transport of 
GDMMs should be explored before decisions about 
production facility location(s) are reached. Gene 
drive modifications may impose particular permitting 
requirements for shipping (Niassy et  al 2022), not 
only due to notification requirements for transbound-
ary movement of GMOs imposed by the CPB but 
also to provide the level of containment necessary to 
avoid inadvertent release in transit that might result in 
unauthorized establishment of the mosquito (Ameri-
can Committee of Medical Entomology 2022).
Multilateral agreements
Given the inherent potential for transboundary move-
ment, considerations for implementation of GDMMs 
extend beyond a traditional bilateral “exporter-
importer” relationship (Rabitz 2021) to include the 
possibility of multiple receiving countries. Planning 
for the use of GDMMs therefore would be greatly 
facilitated by mechanisms to strengthen decision-
making at the regional level. Article 14 of the CPB 
(See footnote 12) acknowledges that “Parties may 
enter into bilateral, regional and multilateral agree-
ments and arrangements regarding intentional trans-
boundary movements of living modified organ-
isms…” and “the provisions of this Protocol shall 
not affect intentional transboundary movements that 
take place pursuant to such agreements and arrange-
ments…” This highlights how the embrace of 
regional GDMM authorization and implementation 
programs by national governments could streamline 
regulatory requirements and unify transport, release, 
and subsequent monitoring and reporting processes.
Multilateral agreements are common and can 
take many forms. For addressing transboundary 
movement of GDMMs in Africa, the most straight-
forward approach could be to build upon an existing 
regional multilateral cooperation agreement, such as 
•	 Both biosafety approval and product approval are 
likely to be required in any country where the 
GDMMs are placed on the market and deliberately 
released.
•	 Expectation that GDMMs will be transported or 
autonomously move into another country where 
they have not received biosafety approval would 
be considered a transboundary event requiring 
prior notification if adverse effects on the envi-
ronment might be anticipated. Even if no adverse 
effects are anticipated, the receiving country could 
take steps to remove the unapproved organism 
if presence of an unapproved organism would 
be illegal there. If the GDMMs have obtained 
biosafety but not   necessary  product approval in 
the receiving country, that country still might take 
action to remove the GDMMs if their laws pro-
hibit dissemination of unapproved products.
•	 If the transgenic construct moves via interbreeding 
into the local mosquito population within another 
country where the GDMMs have not obtained 
biosafety and/or product approval, then again 
the receiving country could take steps to remove 
organisms containing the construct if their pres-
ence would be considered illegal according to the 
language of that country’s regulatory laws per-
taining to LMOs, which include GDMMs. Any 
national decision to remove the GDMMs could 
invoke liability requirements for whomever is 
deemed responsible under the affected country’s 
laws.

--- Page 10 ---
activities, the program aims to bring African countries 
together to decide on a uniform approach to regulat-
ing GDMMs across the continent, which could stand-
ardize the evidence needed for biosafety and product 
approval and foster collaboration among countries in 
decision-making. As currently envisioned, the pro-
gram would not preclude the need for individual 
national product approval, although standardization of 
requirements could greatly simplify the process.
The first phase of the program, from 2016 to 2018, 
focused on raising awareness about GDMMs and 
other GM mosquitoes among decision makers. A 
series of stakeholder consultations were conducted 
across the five economic regions in the continent 
to discuss the potential benefits and risks of these 
technologies to prevent malaria transmission (Teem 
et  al 2019). Following these regional consultations, 
AUDA-NEPAD, with the support of the West Africa 
Health Organization under the Economic Commu-
nity of West Africa States (ECOWAS) established 
the West Africa Integrated Vector Management 
(WAIVM) platform with the aim to operational-
ize a regional platform that will enable a strong col-
laboration among the health sector and other sectors 
(environment, scientific research and higher educa-
tion, agriculture, trade, etc.) to effectively control dis-
ease vectors. WAIVM organized Technical Working 
Groups (TWGs) responsible for developing guide-
lines and other common technical documents that 
would facilitate harmonized assessment and decision-
making for GDMM research. The African Biosafety 
Network of Expertise, a program of AUDA-NEPAD, 
provides services to support improvement of biosafety 
regulatory systems within individual countries.
the charter establishing the Organization of African 
Unity/African Union, the treaty establishing the 
African Economic Community, or those creating 
the various regional economic communities and 
other multinational cooperative relationships. In 
this regard, the African Union Development Agency-
New Partnership for Africa’s Development (AUDA-
NEPAD) is working to establish harmonized regula-
tory guidelines for integrated vector management 
across the African continent, and these guidelines 
will apply to GDMMs.
Adoption of integrated mosquito management 
approaches has been hindered for multiple reasons, 
including the need for increased political backing and 
for better collaboration both within the health sector 
and with other sectors (Beier et al 2008). This has led 
to an increased call for intra- and intersectoral collabo-
ration where environmental management and health 
education are both linked to proactive strategies for 
controlling new and emerging threats. In this con-
text, need has been recognized for regulatory capac-
ity strengthening, as well as appropriate stakeholder 
engagement at all levels, in preparation for decision-
making on testing and implementation of all innova-
tive vector control tools including GDMMs (e.g., 
Beier et  al 2008; World Health Organization 2017; 
Glover et  al 2018). To that end, and in accordance 
with the recommendations of the African Union High 
Level Panel on Emerging Technologies, AUDA-
NEPAD initiated its Integrated Vector Manage-
ment program as a continent-wide flagship program 
to ensure adequate capacity building for the African 
Union’s 55 member states (See footnote ). The pro-
gram strives to ensure that there is a balance between 
safety of the environment and improvement of human 
health so that regulations are not unnecessarily so 
restrictive as to lose the potential health benefits of 
the various vector control approaches. Among other 
It is envisioned that evidence gained from the 
WAIVM regional platform can serve as a model for a 
scale-up to the continent level (Africa-IVM). Through 
this platform, it is expected that AUDA-NEPAD, the 
African Union Commission, and the African Union 
Centres for Disease Control and Prevention (Africa 
CDC) will collaborate with partners to strengthen the 
capacity of regulators and relevant stakeholders in 
Member States and Regional Economic Communi-
ties to ensure that countries and regions are able to 

--- Page 11 ---
explore the potential of new vector control approaches 
including GDMMs. Activities will include (i) estab-
lishment and operationalization of an Africa Vec-
tor Management Advisory Panel; (ii) establishment 
and operationalization of TWGs, (iii) establishment 
and operationalization of an Africa-IVM discussion 
forum, (iv) development and adoption of technical 
documents, and (v) guidance on international nego-
tiations pertaining to vector control.
Malaria intervention frameworks
need for development of new tools for control of vec-
tor-borne diseases such as malaria, the WHO issued 
a position statement in 2020 supporting the investi-
gation of gene drive and other genetically modified 
mosquito approaches and, as mentioned above, has 
published guidance for all aspects of their testing 
(World Health Organization 2021a).
The WHO is often looked to by developing coun-
tries as a source of technical standards and has estab-
lished systematic processes for drugs, diagnostics, 
vaccines and conventional vector control products. 
WHO evaluates vector control products through two 
complementary pathways—the Prequalification path-
way and the New Intervention pathway. The pre-
qualification process is used with products in a class 
for which a WHO policy recommendation exists. 
This pathway assesses quality, safety and efficacy of 
the product, as well as determining the capacity of a 
manufacturer to produce products of consistent qual-
ity in accordance with international standards. The 
WHO list of prequalified products is used by inter-
national procurement agencies, such as the Global 
Fund to fight AIDS, TB and malaria, to guide their 
purchases, and thus has been very influential for prod-
uct uptake in developing countries. The WHO Vec-
tor Control Product Assessment Team (PQT/VCP)
assesses vector control products and public health 
pesticide active ingredients to determine that they can 
be used safely and effectively, and consistently are 
manufactured to a high-quality standard. This is done 
by assessing product dossiers, inspecting manufac-
turing sites and supporting quality-control testing of 
products. Thus far, these activities have largely been 
directed toward chemical pesticides and pesticide-
based products. WHO and FAO, both UN agencies, 
develop specifications for pesticides jointly. The 
specifications encompass the physical appearance of 
the material, its content of active ingredient(s) and 
It is generally assumed that implementation of 
GDMMs to combat malaria will be conducted by or 
under the oversight of a national public health pro-
gram aimed at disease control and elimination, in the 
context of other mosquito and malaria intervention 
efforts (World Health Organization 2021a). How-
ever, opportunities for some form of regional over-
sight could be helpful for designing and managing a 
comprehensive GDMM implementation program, as 
well as addressing issues that may  create challenges 
for regulatory management at a strictly national level, 
such as transboundary movement of a single GDMM 
product or potential for introduction of more than one 
GDMM product within the same or nearby regions 
(James et  al. 2018). Such multinational programs 
have proven beneficial for agricultural biocontrol pro-
grams, as well as SIT against agricultural (Enkerlin 
et al 2017) and public health pests. There is prec-
edent for regional programs focused on malaria inter-
vention (Lover et al 2017), including in Africa .
As a potential public health intervention for con-
trol and elimination of malaria, recommendations 
on GDMMs come under the purview of the World 
Health Organization’s Global Malaria Programme,
which supports Member States to achieve their tar-
gets under the Global Technical Strategy for Malaria 
(World Health Organization 2021b). Citing an urgent 

--- Page 12 ---
review of Wolbachia-mediated population replace-
ment products.
any relevant impurities, physical and chemical prop-
erties, and stability in storage. Whether or how the 
WHO prequalification process will apply to live mos-
quito products remains to be clarified.
The New Intervention pathway, which comple-
ments the prequalification pathway, is intended to 
support deliberations on a WHO recommendation for 
innovative vector control products (i.e. a product type 
without prior WHO recommendation) (World Health 
Organization 2020a). Thus, the New Intervention 
pathway currently is most appropriate for GDMMs 
as a new product class. Presently, new vector control 
interventions are subject to evaluation by the Vector 
Control Advisory Group (VCAG), which focuses 
on assessment of the public health value of the new 
product. As currently stated, once data from at least 
two trials demonstrating epidemiological impact 
have been assessed by VCAG, WHO may commis-
sion a systematic review and convene a Guidelines 
Development Group that will consider broader issues 
including not only the quality of the epidemiological 
evidence, but also the balance of benefits and harms, 
resource implications, the priority of the problem, 
equity and human rights, acceptability and feasibility 
of the new intervention. Under this pathway, qual-
ity management issues are still addressed through the 
prequalification process. Recently proposed consid-
erations for obtaining a permit to release GM bio-
control products may help guide applicants toward 
relevant issues (Tonui et al 2022).
It should be noted that WHO prequalification is 
not required when countries are not seeking funding 
from sources such as the Global Fund to support 
use of the product in vector control efforts. However, 
if countries seek the reassurance of WHO quality 
review of a GDMM product before making a decision 
to implement, it will be necessary to identify a mech-
anism appropriate to the characteristics of GDMMs. 
Clarification of WHO mechanisms for live mosquito 
products is currently in process, initially focused on 
Previous efforts to delineate a development pathway 
for GDMMs have dealt largely with requirements for 
research and testing and have not delved deeply into 
planning for implementation in the context of national 
or regional public health programs (James et al 2018). 
Yet, because GDMMs will be GMOs expected to 
persist and spread to some extent in the environment 
and intended for use as public health tools, substan-
tial early thought must go into planning for the transi-
tion of GDMMs from testing to implementation. This 
analysis examines several aspects of the last step of 
the national regulatory approval process, registra-
tion or new product approval, which standardly sets 
requirements that must be met for commercial use. 
While it still remains to be seen how GDMMs even-
tually might be marketed and delivered, it is impor-
tant to understand how existing regulations and poli-
cies developed for other product types may apply and 
to begin planning for how any challenges arising from 
GDMM characteristics might be addressed.
Countries that have developed regulatory pathways 
for other GMOs will likely be challenged with how to 
fit newer technologies into existing regulations. How-
ever, the relevance of both biosafety and health man-
dates, as well as inexperience with the features of a 
live insect product, may cause confusion and compli-
cate even established regulatory processes. The more 
dissimilar a new GM product is from prior regulatory 
experience (generally GM crops) in each country, 
the more time it is likely to take to develop appropri-
ate capacity and mechanisms for its review. Lack of 
clarity about the roles of different national regulatory 
agencies and uncertainty about data requirements for 
the regulatory submission could substantially delay 
regulatory evaluation and decision-making. There is 
a need to identify the roles and requirements of the 
agencies that are relevant to registration of GDMMs, 

--- Page 13 ---
will carry out its own approval and that standard 
regulatory processes and evidence requirements are 
likely to differ from country to country. A need for 
submission of dossiers to all countries where GDMM 
transgenes might ultimately spread and requirement 
for full product approval in each of these countries 
prior to initial release in a first country would not 
be in line with the history of GM crops. However, 
it might be possible to stage national applications 
according to anticipated timing of transboundary 
movement as judged by distance from the release 
site, for example based on modeling predictions of 
GDMM spread. Regional harmonization of data and 
risk assessment requirements and mechanisms for 
data portability and data sharing among countries 
could substantially simplify the processes for author-
izing implementation at the national or multinational 
level. Initiatives such as the Africa-IVM Programme 
led by AUDA-NEPAD will be central to this effort.
Given the history of malaria mosquitoes devel-
oping resistance to conventional control tools, it is 
worthwhile to consider that the more rapid the area-
wide roll-out of GDMMs the less likely it may be 
that resistance mechanisms become prevalent before 
the first GDMM products are able to fully exert their 
protective effects. If so, this would argue that a more 
harmonized and systematic multi-country approach 
to implementation also would provide the greatest 
opportunity to achieve the widely supported goals of 
eliminating and eradicating malaria (Feachem et  al. 
2019) thereby enhancing the public health benefit of 
GDMMs.
Even though releases of the first GDMM prod-
ucts are not expected for several years, planning for 
regional cooperation should start now. Lessons from 
the experience of the Innovation to Impact (I2I) pro-
gram, which is working toward a collaborative reg-
istration procedure for conventional pesticide-based 
vector control tools to facilitate market access, sug-
gest that such harmonization of regulatory processes 
will not be straightforward. Likewise, the West Africa 
regional biosafety program conducted jointly by the 
West Africa Economic and Monetary Union and 
ECOWAS has been working for more than ten years 
to develop a harmonized biosafety framework. This 
especially in countries likely to be early adopters of 
the technology. Appropriate regulatory frameworks 
may need to be adapted or even created in some 
cases, and clear mechanisms for inter-agency coop-
eration may need to be established. Countries that 
generally are enabling to new GM technologies may 
be more proactive about streamlining their processes, 
timelines, and requirements. While it is possible that 
countries that have no pre-existing GMO regulations 
could be at some advantage as they can develop fit-
for-purpose regulations and institutions, the lack of 
GMO regulations also may reflect a low level of over-
all regulatory capacity, in which case building neces-
sary capacity can be expected to take considerable 
time, resources, and political will. Those developing 
new GDMM products would be well advised to put 
contingency plans in place to respond to unantici-
pated delays and related expenses. Early in creation 
of their business models, developers should under-
take an extensive scoping of all the requirements at 
the national and local level relevant to GDMMs in 
locations where they wish to deliver their products, 
including laws, policies, guidelines, and any useful 
case history or precedents. This will inform the pro-
cedures to be followed, the types of evidence they 
must collect during prior testing phases, as well as the 
agencies/ministries with whom they need to initiate 
ongoing contacts. Proactive communication between 
developers and regulatory agencies can help to build 
understanding and allow time for clarification of 
national review and decision-making processes.
The possibility of transboundary movement of 
transgenic mosquitoes or their genes additionally sug-
gests a need for substantial planning at the regional 
level. Requirements for GMOs under the CPB will 
be considered relevant in most countries, but exactly 
how these requirements apply might take into account 
the expectations for the specific gene drive-modified 
organism under consideration, which may differ 
according to the type of drive system (self-sustaining, 
self-limiting or localized). Most types of GDMMs are 
intended to spread to some extent and therefore might 
eventually cross national borders, although those 
carrying localizing drives are expected to be more 
confined and those with self-limiting drives may 
not persist. It is expected that GDMMs will undergo 
extensive risk and impact assessments in countries 
of initial release for evaluation of potential adverse 
effects. However, experience suggests each country 

--- Page 14 ---
process was only concluded recently with the formal 
adoption by the Conference of the Heads of State of 
the ECOWAS Members states, and is yet to be opera-
tionalized. Fortunately, however, the experience from 
the Sahelian Committee for Pesticides, which is the 
regional body responsible for implementing the Com-
mon Regulations to the Permanent Inter-State Com-
mittee for Drought Control in the Sahel (CILSS) 
member states for pesticide homologation, sets a good 
example of successful regulatory harmonization. This 
Committee has been operational since 1994, and eval-
uates dossiers submitted by pesticide companies for 
approval for sale of chemical pesticides in the seven 
member states of the CILSS.
decisions will be made and who will be involved in 
decision-making (e.g. National Academies of Sci-
ences, Engineering, and Medicine. 2016; Kofler et al 
2018; Kelsey et al 2020; World Health Organization 
2020b), as well as specific operational guidance for 
production, release and post-release monitoring. 
Early and systematic analysis of all the activities nec-
essary to implement a particular GDMM product, 
including anticipated regulatory and policy consider-
ations as well as operational requirements, can inform 
the development pathway and help to optimize the 
efficiency, effectiveness, and safety of these promis-
ing new tools for control and elimination of malaria 
and other mosquito-borne diseases.
If health claims are made and GDMMs are regu-
lated as medical products, the African Medicines 
Agency, which serves as an AU-wide platform for 
coordinating and strengthening harmonization efforts 
for medicines regulation, could be beneficial for mul-
tinational coordination of regulatory requirements,
although this effort also faces challenges (Ncube et al 
2021). Other pan-African authorities, such as the 
Africa CDC, also could facilitate a continent-wide 
harmonized decision-making process on GDMMs 
as a public health product. Although it may not be 
required when countries are not seeking funding from 
sources such as the Global Fund to support the use 
of a GDMM product in their vector control efforts, a 
WHO recommendation may provide additional use-
ful input for national and regional decision-making, 
manufacturing, and implementation planning.
While prior regulatory experience with other 
GMOs as well as live conventional biocontrol agents 
that spread in the environment affords valuable prec-
edents for GDMMs (Romeis et  al 2020), the pres-
ence of both of these characteristics within a single 
product undoubtedly results in a new combination 
of challenges. This analysis touches on some of the 
overarching regulatory issues that must be addressed 
if GDMMs are to achieve their projected potential 
for improving public health, and highlights the ben-
efit of a regional approach. Many details of such 
an approach remain to be clarified, including how 

--- Page 15 ---

--- Page 16 ---
