
--- Page 1 ---
‘Cookie-less’ identification for/against 
privacy? 
Ido Sivan-Sevilla 
Patrick Parham 
Lee McGuigan 

--- Page 2 ---
1 - Introduction 
Continuous identity-building of online consumers has been the crown jewel of the 
digital advertising industry (Alaimo, 2022; Gandy, 2021; Mellet & Beauvisage, 
2020). By using individual data points that go beyond identification details, adver­
tising actors have been intensively crafting user identities for profiling purposes, 
without user awareness (Chant, 2021; EU Commission, 2023), violating consumers’ 
privacy right to freely and continuously reconstruct the self in the face of ever-
changing contexts (Agre & Rotenberg, 1997). Taking control over the construction 
of consumer selves (Benoist, 2008; Elmer, 2003; Zwick & Dholakia, 2004), compa­
nies that facilitated personalised advertising made themselves integral to the 
monetisation of the internet (Crain, 2021; Kant, 2021; Turow, 2011). Identity ser­
vices became infrastructural to online advertising markets that, in the US alone, 
generated USD 225 billion in revenue in 2023 (IAB, 2024). 
The pervasive identity-building of consumers has been enabled by online identifi­
cation architectures. These architectures allow continuous attribution of collected 
data to specific users and feed the representation of individuals as correlated data 
subjects, based on past behaviour, often without the knowledge of the data sub­
jects themselves (Hildebrandt, 2006). Online identification emerged shortly after 
the birth of the Internet. Unique user identifiers in the form of third-party (3p) 
cookies became the most popular anchors for collected user data (Turow, 2011). 
Originally designed to enable continuities in browsing experiences (namely, letting 
products placed in online shopping carts remain there while a user navigated to 
other pages, to continue shopping, perhaps), third-party cookies became the go-to 
instrument for identifying online sessions and tracking consumers’ behaviour for 
identity-building practices (Jones, 2020). Advertising actors have been using third-
party cookie identifiers by dropping them on browsers for persistent consumer 
identification across the web (Sivan-Sevilla & Poudel 2025), the collection of 
browsing history, and to conduct cookie syncing practices for linking consumer 
identities across devices and between different advertising actors (Solomos et al., 
2020). They are called third-party cookies because the companies deploying them 
do not have a direct (or first-party) relationship with the user—the presumption be­
ing that first-parties, like the websites or merchants a user consciously engages 
with, are legitimately authorised to collect user data, whereas third-parties have 
less authorisation. 
Recently under pressure to reform online privacy problems, Apple and Mozilla 
have restricted the use of 3p cookies on their browsers, while Google has repeat­
edly made, and then withdrawn, that same pledge (Morgan & Mazalon, 2024). The 

--- Page 3 ---
looming inability to use third-party cookies for user identification created a vacu­
um for advertising actors. Without attributing collected data to consumers, adver­
tising revenue was perceived to be at risk (Brodherson et al., 2021). Our study fo­
cuses on one highly-publicised method for filling this vacuum: first-party identifi­
cation architectures, which are marketed by the Interactive Advertising Bureau 
(IAB), the leading advertising industry trade association, as ‘privacy first solutions’ 
(Eng, 2024; IAB Canada, 2021). Intriguingly, what were previously marginal con­
sumer identification mechanisms have become increasingly popular and nor­
malised as ‘post-cookies’ & ‘privacy-first’ user identification based on first-party 
user data (Meltzer, 2020; Tabisz, 2023). The advertising industry calls these “uni­
versal” or “cookie-less” identifiers; we suggest that a more fitting name is “first-par­
ty identification architectures,” and ask, what are the privacy implications of first-
party identification architectures? 
‘First-party identification architectures’ provide a means for the digital advertising 
industry to legitimise and maintain certain abilities to identify consumers. First-
party identification architectures are distinguished from prior third-party systems 
based on the source of data and identification mechanisms; in the former, compa­
nies within digital advertising markets (e.g., advertisers, adtech intermediaries, and 
publishers) supply their own proprietary data, including emails, names, and phone 
numbers, to find consumers across ad-supported media venues, rather than relying 
on the passive surveillance executed via third-party cookies. This name is some­
what imprecise, in that these architectures still rely on the sharing of first-party 
data between different digital advertising ecosystem participants; the industry’s 
self-serving use of ‘first-party’ glosses over shifting classifications of what is first-
party versus third-party data in these contexts (McGuigan et al., 2023). Neverthe­
less, we suggest that this term effectively captures the nature of the project—of 
using the legitimising connotation of first-party relationships to authorise contin­
ued tracking and identification. We argue that three types of first-party identifica­
tion architectures have emerged to help facilitate the identification of consumers 
from different positions in the advertising supply chain. 
We recognise three distinct first-party identification architectures that have 
emerged in the online advertising supply chain: (1) Publishers are deploying ‘Uni­
versal ID’ solutions to persistently identify logged-in consumers; (2) Advertising 
technology partners provide ‘Onboarding Identification’ mechanisms to link first-
party advertiser data with user identity across advertising platforms; and (3) 

--- Page 4 ---
‘Walled-Garden Identification’ enables dominant actors that are active on both the 
buyer and seller sides of online advertising, such as Google and Meta, to link their 
first-party user data across the different products of the same ‘walled-garden’ plat­
form. 
Our paper systematically compares the capabilities and recommended uses of first-
party identification architectures to the known surveillance and privacy concerns 
surrounding third-party cookies, thereby allowing a rigorous assessment of 
whether the former meaningfully solve—or essentially reproduce—the problems 
associated with the latter. We first conduct an interdisciplinary review of literature 
on the privacy concerns of 3p cookie-based identification and tracking. We fol­
lowed a snowball approach to collect literature until reaching saturation in terms 
of spotting new themes of privacy issues. We organised the themes that emerged 
from our review into a novel five-part typology of 3p cookie-based privacy con­
cerns. We then used that typology to evaluate exemplars of each first-party identi­
fication architecture: The Trade Desk’s Universal ID 2.0 solution, LiveRamp’s 
RampID onboarding identifier, and Google’s Customer Match walled-garden identi­
fication solution. Our selection of prime examples to analyse was informed by our 
reading of trade publications covering the digital advertising industry, the frequen­
cy of reporting on specific first-party solutions, and the expected adoption rates of 
those solutions by different publishers and AdTech actors (Asim, 2021, 2022). 
All three types of first-party identification architectures are similar in that they rely 
on the encryption of first-party data to identify users. Still, we observed distinct 
identification objectives across these solutions: Universal IDs operate across sites 
within networks of participating publishers; Onboarding identification helps buy­
ers of ads target users in almost any site or platform; and Walled Garden Identifi­
cation helps buyers target users in specific platform environments. We collected 
data on each first-party identification case from technical documentation that the 
developers of the different solutions have made public. For each solution, we 
analysed the code repositories, related industry publications, media reporting, and 
relevant documents, in light of our developed evaluation typology of existing pri­
vacy concerns with 3p cookie identifiers. 
Contrary to industry claims that first-party ID solutions advance consumers’ priva­
cy, we find that first-party identification actually intensifies important aspects of 
online surveillance: the identifiers and the data profiles associated with them can 
be more persistently attached to individuals; the personal data profiles can be 
more comprehensive; and the identifiers can allow for sensitive forms of profiling 
and discrimination to persist and even skirt efforts to disable them. There is nu­

--- Page 5 ---
ance to these findings. We do recognise progress regarding the set of actors that 
can track users and some promising transparency and user agency mechanisms 
that could potentially increase the accountability of online trackers. Still, the ap­
plication of our typology suggests some concerning conclusions about the privacy 
implications of first-party identification architectures. 
First-party identification is far from privacy-inducing. These reforms fail to address 
the structural conditions, incentives, and power relations that remain in contradic­
tion with many legal provisions (Veale & Borgesius, 2022) and any meaningful de­
finition of privacy (Agre & Rotenberg, 1997; Barocas & Nissenbaum, 2014; 
Wachter, 2019). Consumer tracking, profiling, and targeting are deeply entrenched 
as norms and an underlying market infrastructure in these architectures. 
The next section details our research methodology and its limitations. We then 
summarise existing literature on the various privacy implications of third-party 
cookie identifiers, establishing a typology to later assess first-party identification 
architectures. Section 4 applies our criteria to compare the privacy implications of 
first-party identification architectures, analysing a prime example from each first-
party identification type. Section 5 discusses the implications of our findings and 
concludes, detailing future research questions. 
2 - Methods 
The starting point for our data collection was the advertising industry's claims that 
‘first-party’ identification architectures improves users’ privacy, as popular browsers 
shifted away from third party cookies, and the industry sought new user identifica­
tion mechanisms (Eng, 2024; IAB Canada, 2021; Meltzer, 2020; Tabisz, 2023). We 
were fairly skeptical, and decided to first synthesise existing privacy concerns in 
the online advertising supply chain that are driven from the reliance of advertising 
on third-party cookies. 
Data collection started with a survey of existing literature about tracking via third-
party cookies and its privacy consequences. We began with the key words of ‘third-
party cookies.’ We used ACM’s digital library and the Google Scholar search engines 
and collected studies from computer science conferences, law and policy studies, 
and related fields of marketing and media research. The searches yielded 287 arti­
cles, which were then enriched by finding additional studies that cite or are cited 
by works in the initial sample, expanding in a snowball protocol until reaching sat­
uration. We read and filtered these works and ended up with 67 relevant papers 
that were manually classified based on the privacy themes that emerged in the 

--- Page 6 ---
context of third-party cookies. Papers were selected for analysis if they discussed 
any privacy implication from the use of third-party cookies for tracking and target­
ing purposes. This first data collection step led to the establishment of our typolo­
gy, which names five distinct privacy concerns enabled by third-party cookie iden­
tifiers, articulates their types and definitions, and lists a sample of relevant studies 
on each privacy issue (see next section). 
The second step of data collection evolved around the collection of information on 
the suggested first-party identification architectures. Based on the expertise and 
industry experience of one of our co-authors, we broke down suggested first-party 
identification architectures to three types: Universal ID solutions, On-boarding 
identifiers, and Walled Garden identifiers. We then selected three technologies to 
represent the three different types of identification architectures based on: (1) The 
Trade Desk UID2.0’s positioning as the leading industry wide solution that has 
been tested by significant number of advertisers and seen continued adoption 
(Asim, 2022; Barber, 2024; Hercher, 2024); (2) LiveRamp RampID’s development 
from the continued leading onboarding firm in the industry (Hercher, 2019; 
Shields, 2023); and (3) Google Customer Match’s position as the solution from 
largest Adtech firm and platform by market share and revenue (Yuen, 2024). 
We then dived into these three identification architectures and collected data from 
their github repositories, industry publications, and media reporting. Our main 
sources include official documentation and industry reports from magazines such 
as Digiday, AdExchanger, and eMarketer. We also looked into the code repositories 
and websites of the companies that own the solutions and used the materials pro­
vided to assess how each solution works in the broader ad supply chain. 
We analysed the collected data on each first-party solution to understand its 
broader privacy implications in the context of existing privacy concerns with third-
party cookies. The list of themes that emerged in step #1 served as a useful guide­
line for understanding the newly proposed solutions, since they address long-term 
privacy concerns on what is enabled by third-party cookies, and serve as a point of 
reference to understand our main puzzle - whether cookie-less identification archi­
tectures improve or undermine users’ privacy. 
Importantly, and as explained in the introduction, we follow the framing of the 
digital advertising industry when considering what to include as ‘first-party’ identi­
fication mechanisms. Instead of relying on passive surveillance conducted by third-
party cookies, the first-party solutions under study supply their own proprietary 
data to create user identifiers and sync those between actors in the ad supply 

--- Page 7 ---
chain. First-party, in that sense, is not necessarily first-party to the user, but first-
party to the actor that identifies the user in the ad supply chain (publisher, ad net­
work, or walled garden service). The industry uses legitimising connotation of 
‘first-party’ relations to justify continued tracking and identification, and we aim to 
assess whether ‘first-party’ relations between the sources of the data and the actor 
that conducts the identification are indeed harmless from a user privacy perspec­
tive. 
Our literature review is not an exhaustive list of all third-party cookie-based track­
ing studies. We followed the snowball approach, and relied on our experience and 
expertise in studying this field, to come up with what we consider the most impor­
tant privacy implications of third-party cookie advertising. Additional limitations 
are related to our ability to decode and navigate the details of each first-party ID 
specification. Despite our efforts to examine and analyse these first-party identifi­
cation architectures, the available documentation does not clearly disclose all the 
relevant details of their functionalities and implementation. We tried to verify our 
understanding with direct questions to the companies but were unable to retrieve 
more revealing details. Our findings may not have a long shelf life. Any changes to 
implementation practices could affect the privacy implications of the different so­
lutions. 
3 - Literature review: the privacy implications from 
third-party cookie based advertising 
Table 1 below captures an array of different privacy concerns that emerged from 
analysing the literature on third-party cookies. The first two concerns are technical 
- the usage of third-party cookies to identify and track users across Web, mobile, 
and smart technologies has enabled (1) tracking users across different sites, and 
(2) tracking users over time, as these cookies get synced and persist for long peri­
ods of time. The next two concerns are about user rights. Third-party cookie based 
tracking (3) makes opting-out very difficult for users, with many trackers often ig­
noring users’ preferences, while providing very little, if any, (4) tracker transparen­
cy on who exactly tracks the user over an array of sites and apps. A fifth privacy 
concern that emerged from the literature is the ability of trackers to use sensitive 
categories for targeting users. This is a consequence of previous affordances en­
abled by third-party cookies. The sample column in the table represents the most 
comprehensive empirical works that studied the privacy concern. The paragraphs 
below summarise and demonstrate each concern from the reviewed literature. 

--- Page 8 ---
3.1 Cross-site tracking 
One of the most commonly discussed limitations on users’ ability to keep their 
identity fragmented online is the use of third-party cookie identifiers to identify 
and track users across sites. Scholars have been measuring the volume of cross-site 
tracking conducted by various actors, revealing tracking levels based on type of 

--- Page 9 ---
websites (Sivan-Sevilla & Poudel, 2025), dominance and reachability of certain 
trackers, and practices of syncing and forwarding 3p cookie IDs between trackers 
for greater visibility on user behaviour (Fouad et al., 2020; Karaj et al., 2019; Lib­
ert & Binns, 2019; Macbeth, 2017; Papadopoulos et al., 2019; Roesner et al., 2012; 
Yang & Yue, 2020). Lerner et al. (2016) showed how cross-site tracking via third-
party cookies on the Web has increased in prevalence and complexity between 
1996-2016, with ‘more sites…giving more third parties the opportunity to track 
users’ (p. 1007). 
Cross-site tracking is mostly carried out by a specific set of dominant trackers, with 
a small number of third-party trackers observing an increasing portion of users’ 
behaviour on the Web (Englehardt & Narayanan, 2016; Lerner et al., 2016). The 
reach of trackers is the highest for Google, then Amazon and Facebook, and a long 
tail of Criteo, Microsoft, Twitter, Adobe and others (Solomos et al., 2020). Specifi­
cally, Google’s cross-site tracking reach is significantly higher than all other actors 
(Englehardt & Narayanan, 2016; Fouad et al., 2020; Lerner et al., 2016; Samaras­
inghe & Mannan, 2019). 
Studies have found that trackers frequently share third-party cookie IDs with one 
another, in what has been framed as ‘cookie syncing.’ On average, a user experi­
ences one cookie syncing per 68 web page requests (Papadopoulos et al., 2019). 
Interestingly, some cookie-syncing practices promote a ‘universal’ ID for users, by 
setting cookie IDs that were previously set by other domains. In 131 cases of third-
party cookie ID sharing, Papadopoulos et al. (2019) spotted the sharing of ‘ID sum­
maries’–lists of user IDs that other domains used for a particular user–to enable 
greater visibility on users. Third-party cookies have enabled user tracking across 
the majority of visited web pages, by various third-parties, and allowed trackers to 
share user IDs, through cookie syncing and forwarding practices, creating real-time 
visibility on user behaviour by an increasing amount of trackers. 
3.2 Longitudinal tracking 
Third-party cookies enable trackers to learn about users over time, creating a lon­
gitudinal understanding of user interests and intents. Longitudinal tracking is en­
abled by the respawning of third-party cookie IDs. In contrast to ‘regular’ third-par­
ty cookie IDs, studies showed how users can no longer prevent tracking just by 
deleting their cookies (Fouad et al., 2022). Respawned cookies replicate the user 
ID based on features of the user’s machine such as IP addresses or user’s browser 
agent. Linking stateless and stateful user identifiers, trackers can create longitudi­
nal user profiles by linking users’ activity before and after they clean third-party 

--- Page 10 ---
cookies in their browsers. 
Longitudinal tracking is also enabled by the cookie-syncing practices described in 
section 3.1 On average, a user gets cookie syncs for seven user IDs over the period 
of a year (Papadopoulos et al., 2019), ensuring that trackers can maintain visibility 
on the user over time. Interestingly, some of the most dominant advertising track­
ers–Rubicon, Yahoo, and others–set cookie IDs that remained valid for more than 
20 years, violating EU’s cookie law (Samarasinghe & Mannan, 2019). 
3.3 Opt-out limitations 
Relatedly, limitations are also posed on users’ ability to comprehend and decide on 
the level of online tracking they will be subject to online. Complicated third-party 
cookie-based tracking mechanisms present challenges for even tech-savvy users in 
their management of privacy online (Acar et al., 2014). Challenges include the de­
ceptive language of tracking consent notices in consent management platforms 
(CMPs), which then share user’s preferences with third-party trackers (Matte et al., 
2020). Evaluation of post-GDPR effects has shown that users can still be tracked 
across almost 90% of popular sites, and deceiving methods are prominently used 
to coerce users into providing their consent for third-party cookie-based tracking 
(Sanchez-Rola et al., 2019). When presented with a privacy policy to make a deci­
sion to opt out of data practices, readers form an impression that what they have 
read aligns with reasonable expectations and not with what is actually in the text 
(Martin, 2015). 
Research on the effectiveness of the top five CMPs has demonstrated that only 
11.8% meet the minimum compliance requirements under the GDPR (Nouwens et 
al., 2020). Further, the third-party cookie consent banners employ “dark patterns” 
through design choices such as defaults, aesthetic manipulation, and obstruction 
that do not allow for users to make meaningful decisions (Graßl et al., 2021). Re­
search on the ideal version of cookie banners and consent interfaces found that 
when consent mechanisms are complex, technical, and ambiguous users are more 
likely to consent to disclose more information, without understanding why (Habib 
et al., 2022). Regardless of how consent mechanisms are presented, research has 
demonstrated that in 49 percent of EU websites, a cookie is placed before a user 
gives consent to data collection (Trevisan et al., 2019), questioning the ability for 
users to have meaningful agency to decide on the levels of third-party cookie-
based identification & tracking. 

--- Page 11 ---
3.4 Lack of tracker transparency 
The level of transparency provided by trackers who engage in third-party cookie 
based tracking was found to be limited as well. Users cannot follow the dynamics 
and complexity of third-party cookie-based tracking practices nor can they under­
stand what is collected on them and by whom. They rely on full disclosures by 
publishers in their privacy policies, but those policies fail to describe observed 
tracking practices. Libert and Binns (2019), for instance, found a misfit between the 
way news websites describe tracking practices in their privacy policies and the 
tracking observed on their sites. Fouad et al. (2022) studied the respawning of 
cookies and inspected third-party cookie policies in 142 websites to find that none 
of them describe the respawning behaviour observed in the study. 
3.5 User targeting based on sensitive categories 
Studies found how advertising agencies enjoy a significant amount of discretion 
when targeting users and can easily leverage sensitive information to construct 
audience segments, as detailed below. As advertising agencies continue to em­
brace big data technologies in audience construction and optimisation, they make 
considerations based on available demographic data attributes (Beauvisage et al., 
2023). Advertisers link third-party cookies to other data sources, allowing buyers 
of ads to pair their consumer data with third-party cookies, beyond what passive 
surveillance of browsing behaviour can provide, potentially circumventing restric­
tions on the targeting of users based on sensitive assembled categories (Sherman, 
2021). Data sources for user targeting are barely limited. Previous studies showed 
how a range of ad actors, online and offline, can contribute to profiling consumers 
for marketing purposes and identified instances where advertiser-uploaded lists 
have violated platform policies when targeting users based on categories such as 
race, religion, politics, sex life, or health (Choi et al., 2020; Wei et al., 2020a). 
Our five-criteria typology for the privacy concerns in third-party cookies-based ad­
vertising guides our following assessment of first-party identification architectures 
and their privacy implications. 
4 - ‘Privacy-preserving’ first-party identification 
architectures? 
Our analysis of ‘first-party’ identification architectures follows the rhetoric of the 
advertising industry and considers architectures that rely on data sources that are 
first party to the identifying actor, which can be a publisher, an ad network, or an 

--- Page 12 ---
advertising platform. We begin by distinguishing three distinct types of first-party 
identification architectures (4.1). We then conduct a privacy analysis of each first-
party data solution by selecting one suggested application of the ID architecture 
and evaluating that solution based on our typology of privacy concerns (4.2). We 
draw comparisons both across solutions and in relation to how the industry is cur­
rently using third-party cookie-based user identification (Table 2). 
4.1 First-party ID formulation & usage across the ad supply chain 
The use of first-party data for the continued identification and targeting of users 
without the support of third-party cookies is pursued by three different types of 
identification architectures: 1) Universal IDs, 2) Onboarding identification, and 3) 
Walled Garden identification. 
‘Universal IDs’ (UIDs) are designed to persistently identify users across a network 
of participating publishers. They take advantage of the trend toward a “data-wall” 
business model, wherein publishers restrict access to content to users who create 
a "free" account and pay with their data (Evens & Van Damme, 2016; Grover & 
Baik, 2024). The advertising companies, that are US-based companies, are using 
the American legal concept of Personally Identifiable Information (PII) to describe 
the type of information from which user tokens will be generated. When a user 
agrees to login to a publisher’s website using PII, such as an email, the UID opera­
tor (which could be an advertising or media company) generates an identity token 
unique to that user. When the user is logged in to their account, they can be recog­
nised on any other website participating in the UID network by the UID operator. 
Importantly, different publishers and advertisers will receive different tokens for 
the same user, limiting their own ability of persistent identification. 
‘Onboarding identification’ is an architecture that relies on first-party data sources 
of the advertising network, and replaces the third-party cookie ID syncing func­
tionality between third-party trackers. This architecture enables buyers of online 
advertisements to target desired consumers across the various advertising plat­
forms they want to work with (mobile, video, social media sites, and etc.). 
‘Walled Garden identification’ is the means by which dominant actors that are ac­
tive on both the buyer and seller sides of online advertising allow advertisers to 
link their first-party user data across the different products owned by the same 
dominant actor. Google, for instance, identifies users across display, search, and 
YouTube (Janardhan, 2023), based on first-party data sources it owns on users, en­
abling advertisers to target users across the different Google products 

--- Page 13 ---
Figure 1 below, created by the authors, illustrates how different first-party identifi­
cation architectures come together and serve different purposes across the seller 
and buyer sides of the online advertising supply chain. The starting point for any 
first-party identification architecture is the first-party data sources, collected by ei­
ther sellers (through user logins) or buyers (through past advertising transactions 
and customer sales data), over time. From the seller's side, participating websites 
that are part of a ‘Universal ID’ solution (architecture #1 in the figure) ask their 
users to log into a personal account, using login details such as an email address. 
An account log-in initiates the creation of an encrypted identification token by the 
designated Universal ID operator. These tokens are then used to bid for display ads 
and target the associated users. From the buyer side, advertisers leverage their 
first-party data to identify and target customers for ads on other user platforms. 
Through ‘Onboarding identification’ solutions (architecture #2 in the figure), buyers 
can target customers in almost any desired medium, given the breadth of actors 
who participate in the onboarding identity graph of the ad network. Through 
‘Walled Garden first-party identification’ (architecture #3 in the figure) buyers can 
target customers in products within the walled garden. 
We now discuss the three exemplars within these categories - TradeDesk’s UID 2.0 
as a Universal ID solution, Liveramp’s RampID as an ‘Onboarding identification’ so­
lution, and Google’s Customer Match as a ‘Walled Garden’ solution. 

--- Page 14 ---
4.1.1 TradeDesk’s Unified ID (UID) 2.0 - ‘Universal ID’ 
The solution creates first-party user identification from the seller side (the publish­
ers). It is anchored by the credential(s) users offer when they log in to publishers’ 
websites. Upon initial login, users will be asked to consent to receiving targeted 
advertisements. If they agree, the publisher connects with the ‘UID2.0 Operator,’ a 
service that stores user keys and distributes them to relevant actors. The operator 
turns the hashed user email or phone number into a ‘Raw Unified ID’ (Raw UID) 
with secret salts added. The ‘Raw ID’ serves as a unique pseudo-anonymous iden­
tifier; it is then encrypted to create a ‘UID2.0 token’ that is further shared with 
Supply Side Platforms (SSPs) in the bidstream. The usage of tokens instead of raw 
IDs in the bidstream prevents participating actors on the seller side from viewing 
the ‘raw UID’ that could have enabled persistent user tracking. Each entity in the 
server side will receive a different token for the user from the UID operator. De­
mand Side Platforms (DSPs) from the buyer side (which bid into auctions on behalf 
of advertisers) can match encrypted UIDs from SSPs in the bid stream based on de­
cryption keys they get from ‘UID Operators.’ Overall, the TradeDesk solution creates 
a PII-based user identifier that is shared among participating actors from the seller 
(publishers) and buyer (advertisers) side, with the technical possibility for users to 
opt-out and get more information from UID2.0 operators on the type of user track­
ing that is taking place. 
4.1.2 LiveRamp’s RampID - ‘Onboarder Identifier’ 
This solution is distinct from the previous one in that it is triggered by first-party 
user data from the buyer side. Advertisers and marketing agencies use first-party 
user identification obtained from their customers and can upload those first-party 
identifiers to the LiveRamp platform, along with the destination advertising plat­
form in which they want to target users. The first-party user identifier provided by 
buyers is then matched to a pseudonymous user ID —RampID— within LiveRamp’s 
platform. The RampID is translated into platform-specific identifiers (e.g., mobile 
device IDs) according to the advertiser’s targeting preference (LiveRamp, 2024). 
In order to identify users and ultimately generate a RampID, LiveRamp’s ‘AbiliTech’ 
platform merges multiple sources of data on users, including offline PII and 
pseudoanonymous identifiers (LiveRamp, 2022c). These offline and online pairings 

--- Page 15 ---
are then merged within the AbiliTech platform to represent users (LiveRamp, 
2022c). LiveRamp consolidates offline PII about a known individual including: 
email addresses, postal addresses, phone numbers, and enables resolution where 
individuals have multiple identifiers in these categories (LiveRamp, 2022c). The 
LiveRamp algorithm then translates this pairing to a RampID via pseudoanony­
mous PII from the partners (LiveRamp, 2022c). Offline PII and Online device identi­
fiers can now be matched to represent the user as a RampID, and enable other of­
fline and online data sources about the user to be paired (LiveRamp, 2022c). The 
matching ID, ‘RampID,’ is encrypted in the real-time bidding process, when buyers 
attempt to buy ad space based on the RampID, and can only be decrypted by sup­
ply-side platforms (SSPs) and demand-side platforms (DSPs) who are part of the 
LiveRamp network (LiveRamp, 2022d). 
Since RampID is based on first-party data collected or purchased by advertisers, 
users have very limited visibility or points of intervention in the process. Still, 
users can choose to opt-out from the RampID solution when they log into websites 
and share their email address in exchange for content. Their email address can ei­
ther be connected to a RampID through LiveRamp’s API, or disconnected from the 
RampID solution in case users choose to opt-out (Asim, 2022; LiveRamp, 2022c). 
4.1.3 Google’s Customer Match / Ads Data Manager - ‘Walled Garden Solution’ 
On October 11, 2023, Google presented its ‘Google Ads Data Manager,’ a platform 
that enables the use of first-party identifiers held by advertisers and marketing 
agencies for the targeting of consumers across Google’s walled-garden products. 
The platform aims to simplify the management of first-party data connections be­
tween buyers of online ads and Google’s products. According to media reporters, it 
shows the desire of Google to leverage its massive logged-in user base as a re­
placement for third-party cookies (Joseph, 2024). 
This first-party identification architecture is similar to the previously detailed 
RampID solution. It is generated from the will of an advertiser / marketing agency 
to target potential customers based on a set of first-party identifiers held by ad 
buyers, such as email addresses, phone numbers, names, and home addresses (Ja­
nardhan, 2023). Those first-party identifiers are then matched with Google’s first-
party identifiers of logged-in customers across Google products - Search Engine, 
Gmail, YouTube, and Google’s Display Network (the array of websites where Google 
exists as a third-party, not necessarily via cookies). The newly introduced Google 
Ads Data Manager incorporates Google’s existing first-party targeting solution, 
Customer Match, through which the ID matching takes place (Google, n.d.-c, 2024). 

--- Page 16 ---
In contrast to RampID which can enable advertisers to target users across different 
advertising platforms, this Google solution is native to Google products, and en­
ables advertisers to find users within Google’s (sprawling) walled garden. Advertis­
ers can upload their first-party data by connecting sophisticated first-party data 
management platforms, such as customer relationship management (CRM) plat­
forms and customer data platforms (CDPs), or through simply uploading a *.csv file 
of customer data to the Google Ads platform that contains the headers “Email,” 
“Phone,” “First Name,” “Last Name,” “Country,” and “Zip" (Google, n.d.-b, n.d.-d, n.d.-f; 
Janardhan, 2023). 
Advertisers also have the option to protect the PII data of their customers from ex­
ternal stakeholders outside the Google network using the SHA256 algorithm for 
one-way hashing (Google, n.d.-e). Google matches the uploaded PII with corre­
sponding data associated with Google Accounts to create the final Google Match 
segment that can be used for targeting by Google (Google, n.d.-a). 
4.2 Privacy implications of first-party ID architectures 
The section below examines the privacy implications of first-party identification 
architectures, in light of existing privacy concerns from third-party cookies. 
4.2.1 Cross-site tracking 
The ability to identify users across an increasing number of websites and advertis­
ing platforms, and by an array of ad buyers, has been one of the main privacy con­
cerns enabled by third-party cookie identifiers. The different types of first-party 
identification architectures replicate this technical privacy concern, but limit the 
set of actors who can do so. Still, the Universal ID operator can persistently identi­
fy users across the sites of any publishers participating in the Universal ID solu­
tion; users are also persistently identified by buyers of online ads, across different 
advertising platforms and walled garden products. From the seller's side, cross-site 
tracking is only enabled on publishers who participate in the Universal ID solution, 
potentially limiting the amount of actors who get cross-site visibility on users. 
UID2.0 enables cross-site tracking only to the UID operator who still gets to view 
users in the bidstream across their browsing experiences. UID tokens are constant­
ly updated to ensure that unapproved entities with access to the bid stream can­
not build profiles based on UID tokens over time. Liveramp’s RampID architecture 
also enables cross-site tracking by matching and sharing Ramp IDs across adver­
tising platforms. Google’s Customer Match enables cross-site tracking as well, 
since advertisers are able to target Google users across third-party publishers that 

--- Page 17 ---
are part of the Google Display Network. Still, the limits placed on the number of 
partners able to identify individuals through the introduction of encryption mecha­
nisms could be considered an improvement over the amount of cross-site tracking 
based on third-party cookie identifiers. 
4.2.2 Longitudinal tracking 
The ability to learn about user behaviour over time is currently enabled by various 
third-party cookie-based tracking techniques such as the respawning and syncing 
of cookie IDs. In first-party identification architectures, this capability is enabled by 
the introduction of much more persistent identifiers, which are based on PIIs such 
as user emails or phone numbers. This enables trackers to learn about user behav­
iour over longer periods of time, based on an identifier that is less likely to change 
frequently in comparison to third-party cookie IDs, and is often used in other of­
fline data transactions, linking together a rich history of user records.
UID2.0 architecture enables longitudinal tracking for advertising and targeting 
platforms by relying on users’ PII-based login data. For LiveRamp, the seed PII that 
builds the identifier is not expected to frequently change over time, potentially en­
abling participating actors to track the user over longer periods of time in compar­
ison to current third-party cookies-based identifiers. Similarly, Google’s Customer 
Match associates user’s PII with the user's Google login, which is unlikely to 
change frequently. 
In all three identification solutions under study, the user identifier is more persis­
tent than a pseudo-anonymous third-party cookie identifier in the previous ecosys­
tem. This might lead to potentially more persistent user tracking over time. 
4.2.3 Opting-Out 
All first-party identification architectures introduce technical improvements to the 
ability of users to exercise their rights, with dedicated opt-out mechanisms from 
personalised advertising that send opt-out signals to all actors in the bidding 
process about user’s preferences (Asim, 2022; Google, n.d.-a; LiveRamp, 2022b; 
UnifiedID2, 2022). As opposed to current usage of third-party cookies, where track­
ers can easily escape or not provide functional opt-out options (Papadogiannakis 
et al., 2021), the first-party identification architectures enable an opt-out option 
from the start, by introducing pop-up windows that ask for user consent upon log­

--- Page 18 ---
ging in to a website. 
Still, the likelihood that these opt-out mechanisms will allow users to fully realise 
their preferences remains questionable. Users may feel pressured against opting-
out as the decision could mean losing access to publishers’ content. In fact, the 
identification industry specifically states that the onus is on publishers to convince 
users to opt-in for targeted advertising in exchange for online content (Titone, 
2021). Publishers are the ones who need to decide on the value exchange for users 
who do not wish to be targeted. They might prevent those users from viewing 
their content, making the designed opt-out mechanisms non-feasible across the 
different solutions. For walled garden products and other advertising platforms, 
users can refuse identification and targeting in the platforms’ settings, but will 
have to be consistent. Researchers will have to verify that consent pop ups are not 
tricking users into accepting tracking terms they do not fully understand. Addition­
ally, while Google’s user choice and control documentation specifies that users can 
opt out from personalised ads that are served based on records of web browsing 
and app usage, it does not specify how users can manage their preferences when 
advertisers directly upload their PII into Google’s Ads Data Manager and Customer 
Match for targeting. 
4.2.4 Tracker transparency 
Transparency regarding how third-party cookies are used for tracking and what da­
ta is collected about users has been insufficient (Fouad et al., 2022). The complex 
dynamics of tracking were not fully detailed and disclosures on privacy policies 
failed to describe observed tracking in practice (Papadogiannakis et al., 2021). In 
contrast, all first-party identification architectures promise to provide greater 
tracker transparency, but the extent to which users will be able to view records 
collected on their activity remains quite ambiguous. UID2.0 and LiveRamp’s Ramp 
ID provide little insight into their promises of tracking transparency. They all pro­
vide ‘transparency mechanisms,’ but it is unclear how those mechanisms will pro­
vide up-to-date information to users on how they are being identified and by 
whom in a dynamic advertising delivery environment. Technically, in the complex 
settings of user identification and targeting for ads, it is almost impossible to pro­
vide users with accurate information on who is tracking them at any given mo­
ment. The first-party identification architectures under study are unclear on how 
exactly they will bridge this gap. 
4.2.5 Sensitive targeting 
All first-party identification architectures present significant concerns for sensitive 

--- Page 19 ---
targeting, since they have the potential to make it easy and attractive for advertis­
ers to target users based on sensitive attributes (e.g., race, religion, etc.) that are 
subject to legal or other limitations. Advertisers can persistently identify users 
based on their first-party customer data, and then ask targeting platforms to as­
semble ‘look-alike audiences’ based on matched IDs. What that means is that an 
advertiser could use an attribute like race or religion to construct an audience, 
based on their first party-data, and then have an ad platform find those targets, ef­
fectively overriding the restrictions against this sort of discrimination that some ad 
platforms have made through their corporate policies. For instance, suppose an ad­
vertiser wants to target African-Americans on a social media platform that does 
not allow targeting by race. That advertiser could take a first-party dataset for 
which information about race is included (and for which a persistent identifier like 
an email address in known), then sort it into an audience defined by race, and then 
push that custom audience into the platform for activation without having to 
specifically select race-related targeting parameters from that platform. Further, 
the advertiser could request that the platform identify new targets, whose email or 
other IDs are not part of the advertiser first-party data set, via lookalike modeling 
(by other proxies such as postal code and income), which would be preprocessed 
according to a race variable. Such ‘look-alike’ audiences can now be targeted, en­
abling the targeting of African-Americans without specifically stating so to the tar­
geting platforms. 
Advertisers’ capacities —and even incentives— to define and develop these propri­
etary audiences, before first-party user identifiers are encoded for targeting, repre­
sent a concerning feature of the systems under study here. Advertisers constantly 
purchase user data from data brokers to expand profiling of users beyond what 
passive surveillance of browser behaviour can provide. The emphasis on first-party 
data across the identification architectures is encouraging advertisers to further 
leverage their existing customer and sales data, amass additional data around 
those identifiable customers, and to find others with similar traits (LiveRamp, 
2020). Compared to advertisers’ efforts in the current third-party cookie-based 
ecosystem, advertisers are now investing more in technology that can match first-
party customer data to other datasets (Vargas, 2022). This work is carried out via 
existing ‘identity graph’ and new ‘clean room’ technologies that allow advertisers 
to manage individual-level data and encode the data through an ID method of 

--- Page 20 ---
choice; this provides a centralised system to merge online and offline identifiers 
into a consolidated profile to pair with purchased data from data brokers and acti­
vate selected audiences with multiple partners. 
Within The Trade Desk Unified ID 2.0, for instance, the company mentions ‘First-
Party Relationships’ capabilities, where an advertiser is able to upload first-party 
data to be encoded to the UID2.0 for activation across publisher sites (UnifiedID2, 
2022). Similarly, LiveRamp offers advertisers the opportunity to ‘onboard’ their da­
ta where PII can be uploaded in order to be converted into RampIDs and organised 
by segment so that they can be activated in more than 500 different partner plat­
forms (LiveRamp, 2022a). These capabilities resemble the primary service provided 
by Google’s Customer Match previously described. 
Importantly, there is no mechanism to verify how advertisers have segmented first-
party data before importing into these systems, and the first-party identification 
architectures make sensitive population segmentation and bidding very attractive 
for advertisers. As detailed in Section 3, previous research has identified instances 
where advertiser-uploaded lists have violated the policies set by various ad sellers 
or intermediaries to prevent the targeting of users including categories such as 
race, religion, politics, sex life, or health (Wei et al., 2020b). We argue that first-par­
ty identification architectures place a significant amount of importance on leverag­
ing first-party data that encourages advertisers to look for ways to link first-party 
and purchased data through ID solutions, allowing for targeting practices with lit­
tle to no oversight by primary platforms (for example: Meta, 2021; Twitter, 2022). 

--- Page 21 ---

--- Page 22 ---
5 - Discussion and conclusion 
Our study details and evaluates privacy implications of the increasingly popular 
first-party identification architectures being used across the online advertising 
supply chain. We apply a five-part typology to show how the proposed first-party 
ID architectures maintain and, in some cases, even magnify the privacy concerns 
associated with third-party cookies. . Despite the marketing of those ‘cookie-less’ 
solutions as ‘privacy-conscious’ or ‘privacy-first,’ and the attempt of companies to 
distance their brands from the negative publicity surrounding online tracking, 
these first-party identification architectures reproduce AdTech’s market logic of da­
ta-driven optimisation and efficiency through user identification & targeting, mak­
ing very little progress, if any, for users’ privacy. 
The building of dossiers on users through cross-site tracking is enabled by all the 
solutions we examined. User identifiers are becoming more deterministic and per­
sistent (often using personal data such as phone numbers and e-mail addresses), 
potentially enabling tracking over longer periods of time. The efficacy of the opt-
out and self-governed tracking transparency mechanisms enabled by these new ID 
architectures remain questionable in practice, as it is heavily dependent upon 
proper self-implementation of governing arrangements. 
The burden to obtain consent to first-party-based identifiers is on publishers, par­
ticipating actors, and walled garden product managers, who need to convince 
users to accept the targeting in order to monetise their content. These first-party 
identification methods also incentivise advertisers to circumvent targeting policies 

--- Page 23 ---
by providing greater means and incentives to target users based on sensitive cate­
gories. With the pivoting of the industry toward ‘identity graphs,’ ‘clean rooms,’ and 
first-party data, advertisers are now incentivised to target consumers based on the 
rich data profiles they hold on each user. In case sensitive categories like race or 
religion would sound appealing for advertisers, they can easily override existing 
targeting restrictions through ‘look-alike’ audience targeting schemes. 
Ultimately, the business models and working practices of the advertising industry 
lead to a privacy-concerning ad landscape even without third-party cookie identi­
fiers. The implementation of first-party identification architectures by the AdTech 
complex enables similar visibility on consumers, longer consumer tracking, and 
the assembling of more sensitive consumer targeting, with user agency and tracker 
transparency still very questionable. AdTech trackers can still learn about users’ 
demographics data, interest data, intent data (intention to purchase), and measure­
ment data (attribution), maintaining their data-driven business model that does 
not go hand-in-hand with meaningful privacy. 
Despite their apparent resignation to pro-privacy rhetoric, advertisers, advertising 
technology companies and the publishers who sell access to audiences have not 
abandoned their commitments to data-driven efficiency and optimisation (Veale, 
2022); they still want to recognise, as precisely as possible, the probable behav­
iours of consumers and the expected returns on their advertising investments 
(McGuigan, 2023). Creators of first-party identification architectures push for tar­
geting of users based on their first-party data, creating an advertising landscape 
where only they can fully capitalise on the shift away from third-party cookies. The 
way those companies market ‘first-party privacy-preserving Ad Tech’ appear like a 
smokescreen to the real targeting and identification solutions they are pushing 
and advocating for. 
To diverge from this path, we call for the use of user identities in the technical 
sense to be constrained to protect identity construction in the sense of selfhood 
(Hildebrandt, 2013). Such a reform would require a structural change in how on­
line advertising currently works. Instead of allowing advertising actors to collect 
and purchase more users’ data, regulators would have to limit the attributes that 
advertisers can collect on users, and constrain their ability to draw inferences out­
side of the context in which user data were collected. That should also include 
limits on advertisers’ ability to assemble targeting criteria. 
The history of technological development for the delivery of ads has proven time 
and again that change will not come from users’ ability to opt-out and understand 

--- Page 24 ---
the level of tracking they face. Nor will it emerge from advertisers' concerns about 
users’ privacy. Change has to come from public-interest regulators who can fully 
appreciate the structural gaps that enable privacy abuse in the online advertising 
ecosystem. 
References 

--- Page 25 ---

--- Page 26 ---

--- Page 27 ---
