
--- Page 1 ---
ARTICLE
DIANA DIMITROVA 
PAUL DE HERT 
*Author affiliations can be found in the back matter of this article
CORRESPONDING AUTHOR:
Diana Dimitrova
FIZ Karlsruhe – Leibniz 
Institute for Information 
Infrastructures GmbH, 
Germany; Vrije Universiteit 
Brussel, LSTS Group, Belgium
diana.dimitrova@fiz-Karlsruhe.de
KEYWORDS:
right of access; independent 
oversight; human rights; ECHR; 
law enforcement directive
The present paper looks at the right of access to one’s data, especially in the law 
enforcement sector, as developed by the European Court of Human Rights (ECtHR) 
with regard to the right to private life (Article 8) and to effective remedies (Article 
13) in the European Convention on Human Rights (ECHR). Can this right to directly 
access one’s data be (entirely) replaced, as happens with the practice of ‘indirect 
access’, by a system of independent oversight by administrative (data protection) 
authorities? If yes, under what conditions would such a system be rights compatible? 
The ECtHR has recently defined stricter requirements on effective oversight by the 
supervisory authorities which oversee the cases of restrictions on direct access, 
especially as concerns their powers to check the legality of the data processing and 
the restrictions on access, and to communicate the results of their checks to the 
concerned individuals. The paper then demonstrates that ‘indirect access’ procedures 
in three EU Member States – Belgium, France and Germany – are likely to be in breach 
of the rights provided under Articles 8 and 13 ECHR. Although these procedures are the 
result of an implementation of EU law (Article 17(3) Directive 2016/680), they restrict 
the powers of the supervising authorities both with regard to review and subsequent 
communication about the review to individuals.
TO CITE THIS ARTICLE:
Diana Dimitrova and Paul 
de Hert, ‘Real Transparency 
and Real Oversight of Law 
Enforcement Data. The ECHR 
and the Lack of Accountability 
of Indirect Access Procedures’ 
(2025) 21(1) Utrecht Law 
Review 49–69. DOI: https://doi.
org/10.36633/ulr.905

--- Page 2 ---
As police powers have expanded over the years, including the processing of increasing amounts 
of personal data, the issue of when and under what conditions individuals can access their 
own data has become increasingly important. The right of access has been regulated in the EU 
legal order in the law enforcement field since the entry into force of Directive 2016/680 (Law 
Enforcement Directive (LED)). By contrast, the right of access to one’s data under the European 
Convention on Human Rights (ECHR) and in the case law of the European Court of Human 
Rights (ECtHR) has remained more elusive, despite the fact that Convention 108(+), Council of 
Europe Recommendation (87)15 and the Council of Europe Guidelines on data protection in the 
police sector clearly include a right of access to one’s data.
Although the legal instruments of the Council of Europe ‘push’ towards transparency and 
accountability, they remain vague about limitations to access to personal data collected by 
law enforcement authorities. At the level of EU law, the LED contains two procedures for the 
exercise of the right of access. First, the ‘direct access’ procedure contained in Article 14 LED. 
The individuals can turn directly to the law enforcement body with questions about their 
personal data. This law enforcement authority (‘the controller’), as the direct recipient of the 
access request from the concerned data subject, is perfectly situated to handle the request 
and if possible to disclose to the individual all the information provided for in the LED. Secondly,
there is the Article 17(3) LED procedure. Here, there is no direct access and no disclosure of 
data to the individual. Under this ‘exceptional’ procedure, the controller decides to impose a 
(partial) restriction on the right of access pursuant to the respective provisions of the LED. The 
right of access is then replaced by a verification procedure by a data protection authority (DPA) 
overseeing the law enforcement authorities in a given Member State. This second procedure 
is commonly, but not quite accurately, referred to as ‘indirect access’. In a previous paper, 
we identified two shortcomings in the implementation laws of France, Belgium and Germany. 
Contrary to the text and spirit of the LED, these laws severely restrict the powers of the DPAs to 
conduct a review of the data processing and to communicate their findings to the concerned 
data subjects. We concluded that the discussed implementations are likely to be in breach 
of the LED and also of the Charter of Fundamental Rights of the EU (CFREU), especially the 
requirement for independent supervision over the right to data protection in Article 8(3) CFREU.
This finding was confirmed by a recent judgement of the European Court of Justice (CJEU) Ligue 
des droits humains ASBL, BA v L’organe de contrôle de l’information policière in relation to the 
Belgian system of indirect access.
What is lacking in the literature is a human rights accountability-approach complementing the 
foregoing (EU law-based) analysis. How compatible with human rights is the replacement of the 

--- Page 3 ---
right to directly access one’s data by a system of independent oversight by administrative (data 
protection) authorities? We will study this question in the light of ECtHR case law on the right 
of access under Article 8 ECHR (private life) and under Article 13 ECHR (effective remedies). This 
human rights perspective offers instructive guidance on interpreting the powers of the DPAs set 
up in states in and outside the EU to help citizens protect their data. The ECtHR has a rich and 
longstanding case law, offering an ad hoc interpretation of the different types of restrictions 
on transparency and of the powers which (administrative) supervisory authorities should 
have. As we will demonstrate in the following sections, this case law requires, inter alia, that 
restrictions on transparency should be accompanied by independent judicial or administrative 
oversight (analogous to the DPA role under the LED). These authorities need effective powers 
to review the law enforcement authority’s data processing and to communicate their findings 
to the individuals. In its recent case law the ECtHR has tended to require more accountability 
to the individual data subjects by the supervisory authorities which examine the restrictions 
on transparency and the legality of data processing, in contrast to its earlier case law, whose 
weaknesses we criticise in the sections below. 
This paper is structured as follows. First, we will demonstrate that, in the ECtHR case law 
concerning Articles 8 and 13 ECHR respectively, there is no absolute right for the concerned 
individual to have access to their data, as there is likewise no absolute right to be notified 
of the collection of personal data on them (Sections 2 4). We will nonetheless examine the 
prevailing trends in case law regarding access rights, exercised by individuals upon request, 
and the notification obligation of the respective data processing authority, wherein data is 
provided proactively by the controller. Our goal is to extract the transparency rights granted 
by the ECtHR, specifically identifying the types of information individuals are entitled to know 
about the processing of their data by law enforcement authorities.
Then, we will demonstrate that the ECtHR has been concerned less with the question as 
to what information individuals should obtain about the processing of their data than with 
the question as to whether the restrictions on the right of access and/or notification have 
been accompanied by appropriate safeguards such as independent oversight. We will argue 
that there is an evolution in the ECtHR’s case law as concerns the potential replacement of 
transparency rights with a system of independent external supervision, whether via a data 
protection authority or via other, similar means. We will demonstrate that the earlier case law 
(e.g. Leander) did not question the effectiveness of this safeguard, which we will do (Section 
5). The problems with this surrogate safeguard for access are clearly felt in more recent 
surveillance case law (Kennedy, Centrum för Rättvisa, Ekimdzhiev II). The ECtHR is no longer 
satisfied just with an oversight system, but now looks more attentively at the added value 
of such a system, its powers to review and make public its findings (Section 6.1). We argue 
that the ECtHR has indicated that, when oversight authorities check the legality of the data 
processing and/or of the restriction of the disclosure, they should communicate the outcome of 
their review to the concerned data subjects. This trend to check the powers of oversight bodies, 
especially when they are deemed to replace data subject rights like access and notification, 
is also visible in other areas of case law, especially case law concerning data held by the ex-
Communist regimes (e.g. in Haralambie, Szulc, Tudor, etc) (Section 6.2).
Having identified the level of accountability required by human rights law with regard to 
independent (administrative) supervision, the paper turns to existing indirect access procedures 
as implemented under Article 17(3) LED in certain EU Member States. These restrictions on the 
right of access are not only problematic in terms of EU law, but also in terms of human rights 
law (Section 7). Most important in this regard is Belgium’s general and indiscriminate refusal to 
allow direct access and the restricted decision-making powers of the DPAs in terms of disclosure 
of data to the concerned data subjects and the potential restrictions on effective judicial review 
in all three Member States. We end with presenting the legal questions posed in a pending case 
on ‘indirect access’ raised against France (Emmanuel Bodinier et 16 autres requêtes) (Section 
8) and a summary of our findings about the human rights problems associated with ‘indirect 
access’ as an alternative in many legal systems to direct access (Section 9).

--- Page 4 ---
2.1 THE RIGHT OF ACCESS UNDER ARTICLE 8 ECHR: SECTORAL RECOGNITION 
WITH DIFFERENCES
Access to data fosters transparency, which is a prerequisite for accountability. Notification 
duties that inform citizens that their data is collected equally contribute to more transparency 
(see more below, in particular Section 4). As evident from the ECtHR case law, the text of the 
ECHR provides no explicit and general right of access to one’s personal data. As a consequence, 
there are no substantive or procedural requirements on the right of access to be found in the 
ECHR. This enters into conflict with the EU legal order, in particular with the General Data 
Protection Regulation (GDPR) and the LED (detailed provisions), and Article 8(2) CFREU (general 
recognition of a right to access).
The silence of the ECHR explains why the right to access has remained open to development 
and definition by the ECtHR. However, it is difficult to discern a pattern as to the cases in which 
the ECtHR will recognise such a right, especially in the law enforcement field, and as to the 
acceptable restrictions to it. This could be partially attributed to the fact that Article 8 ECHR has 
a broad scope of application: it encompasses the law enforcement field, the national security 
field and areas not covered by either of these fields, e.g. health. 
In non-law enforcement or security related sectors, the ECtHR has more directly and explicitly 
acknowledged a right to access to one’s data, e.g. with regard to information on one’s 
childhood, origins or health, or abolished totalitarian regimes. The rationale for recognising 
this right in specific contexts beyond law enforcement appears to be the acknowledgement 
of its significance for private life, as safeguarded by Article 8 of the European Convention on 
Human Rights (ECHR). A prime example is Gaskin v the UK (1989).
As concerns information about one’s collaboration with former Communist regimes, the ECtHR 
has created obligations for the respondent Member States to give access to 
all relevant and appropriate information which would allow that party to effectively 
counter any allegations of his or her collaboration with the security services […] The 
procedure should equally provide for a possibility to correct any erroneous entries in 
the relevant files.

--- Page 5 ---
In its case law concerning former Communist regimes and topics such as health and one’s 
childhood, at a procedural level, the ECtHR seems to implicitly favour direct access (meaning 
access granted by the party holding the data) as the default setting.
By contrast in the law enforcement and national security sectors, the ECtHR has been more 
hesitant about establishing that a right of access exists per se. When examining a certain case, 
it has never denied its advantages for the data subject. One learns from the facts of different 
cases and the ECtHR’s reasoning that accessing the information held by law enforcement and 
security authorities might help to curb misuse of the data, inter alia because access enables 
the data subject to rebut the contested information. It is also seen as a means to ‘rectify’ 
the informational asymmetry between the authorities and individuals. To achieve these 
purposes, the ECtHR has established that the right of access encompasses access to personal 
data included in law enforcement/secret police database files and the individual data elements 
included in files. It has also been broadly read to include access to documents, including access 
to a whole police file.
The ECtHR’s acknowledgement of the existence of the right of access to one’s data, 
especially in the national security field, has been implicit rather than explicit, in the sense 
that it acknowledged that a restriction on access constitutes an interference or was part of 
the interference with Article 8 ECHR. For example, in Segerstedt-Wiberg and Others v Sweden 
(2006), the ECtHR explicitly acknowledged the restriction on access as a separate interference 
with Article 8 ECHR. The ECtHR postulated that ‘[it] […] finds it established that the impugned 
refusal to advise the applicants of the full extent to which information was being kept about 
them on the Security Police register amounted to interference with their right to respect for 
private life.
In most other cases, the reasoning has been even more implicit. In these cases, the ECtHR does 
not always acknowledge the restriction on access as a separate restriction to Article 8 ECHR.
Leander v Sweden (1987), also one of the older cases on access, concerned the issue of a 
national security check in the employment context. The ECtHR noted that the refusal to grant 
access to the applicant’s file constituted an element of the interference with Article 8 ECHR,
but it did not analyse this refusal separately or as a separate interference. 
2.2 THE THIN LINE BETWEEN ‘NATIONAL SECURITY’ AND ‘LAW 
ENFORCEMENT’
We note that Article 8 ECHR regulates, amongst other things, the grounds for restricting the 
right to private life as provided for in that same Article, including the disclosure of data to the 
concerned individual. As evident from Section 2.1, two of these grounds are ‘national security’ 
and ‘the prevention of disorder or crime’ (or law enforcement, in other words). What is also 
evident is that the ECtHR normally allows Member States a broader margin of appreciation in 

--- Page 6 ---
national security matters as compared to other contexts. We interpret this to mean that if 
the ECtHR has ruled in individual cases that non-disclosure of information to the concerned 
individuals constitutes an interference with Article 8 ECHR in the national security field, it can be 
hardly argued that it does not constitute an interference in the law enforcement field. 
The question remains as to how to draw the line between national security and law enforcement 
for the purposes of establishing trends about the transparency which the ECtHR allows in 
relation to these two contexts. As observed by other academics, there is no single definition 
of national security across the different EU Member States and hence the delineation between 
national security and law enforcement matters is not always straightforward. Amongst the 
clear-cut distinctions one could cite spying for a foreign government as a national security 
matter as against the theft of a bag as a law enforcement matter. However, a lot of cases are 
not so clear-cut. For example, terrorism is considered by EU law (including in the interpretations 
provided by the Court of Justice of the EU (CJEU)) and by the ECtHR to be both a national 
security and law enforcement concern.
The above discussion bears relevance for our paper in two major aspects: (i) because of the 
fluid separation between the two concepts, it is reasonable to examine the ECtHR case law on 
national security matters and transparency and apply it to transparency in law enforcement 
matters, where possible, bearing in mind the fact that (ii) the ECtHR has established limits on 
the restrictions on the right of access even in national security cases. This means that a fortiori 
it might be the case that the ECtHR is even stricter on the restrictions on transparency in cases 
of (minor) crimes.
As seen from the two Swedish examples, in Segerstedt-Wiberg and Leander discussed in Section 
2.2, as well as from Gaskin (see Section 2.1), when the ECtHR acknowledges that a refusal of 
access constitutes (part of) an interference with Article 8 ECHR, the ECtHR examines whether the 
respondent Member State provided enough safeguards when imposing restrictions on access 
to one’s data or documents, e.g. whether the refusal was accompanied by legal channels for an 
independent review or remedy. This examination is sometimes performed directly under Article 
8 ECHR or separately under Article 13 ECHR, or both. A prime example of the examination 
under Article 13 ECHR is Segerstedt-Wiberg v Sweden.

--- Page 7 ---
As the ECtHR established in Segerstedt-Wiberg and Others v Sweden, refusals of access to one’s 
data normally trigger the applicability of the right to effective remedies. When Article 13 ECHR 
is applicable, it confers on individuals, according to the ECtHR’s case law, a right of access to 
a national authority having competence to examine whether this Convention grievance was 
justified or not. To perform its examination, this authority should have access to all the necessary 
information and offer adversarial proceedings, allowing the concerned individual to contest the 
decisions of the competent (law enforcement) authorities. The authority does not always have 
to be a judicial authority. What is important are its powers. This distinction between judicial 
and non-judicial review, remedy or oversight is more than just a trifle. Opening the doors for non-
judicial oversight as a way for human rights compliance has triggered many cases. 
The cases reveal that the ECtHR has not always required a judicial review of the interferences 
with the rights protected under Articles 8 and 13 ECHR. This means that, as evidenced by 
its case law, it has also extensively examined the safeguards provided by administrative 
authorities such as the DPAs in the EU Member States. These are the same authorities which 
are entrusted by EU law with carrying out the ‘indirect’ access procedure under the LED. Thus, 
the ECtHR case law on the requirements about the powers of these authorities becomes 
relevant in interpreting the ‘indirect’ access procedure.
Notification of (secret) surveillance or processing is, like access, instrumental for transparency 
towards the concerned individual. As such, it has an important role in data protection laws.

--- Page 8 ---
Notification is a key guarantee, in particular in cases where governments or others engage in 
secret surveillance unknown to the citizen concerned. Notification, when possible, can then 
restore the balance. Both concepts—access and notification—are related: after notification the 
informed citizen can engage in an access request to know more about the data collected by 
others. It is not surprising to learn that the ECtHR case law on notification provides additional 
useful insights relevant to understanding the ECtHR’s approach to the right of access to one’s 
data. 
Like access, notification is also lacking in the text of the ECHR, but it is sometimes recognised as 
an element or sub-right under Article 8 ECHR, similar to the right of access to one’s data. The 
ECtHR case law does not always clearly distinguish between the right of access to one’s data 
and/or files and the right to notification of surveillance. This could be partially explained by the 
fact that neither of them is officially recognised as a full (sub-) right under the ECHR. Normally, 
it is understood that notification refers to the authorities proactively informing the concerned 
individuals that they have been subject to (secret) surveillance. The right of access, by contrast, 
refers to the individual requesting the authorities, be it national security or law enforcement 
ones, what information they have been processing in relation to them.
The ECtHR normally accepts that the question of notification falls within the protection granted 
by Article 8 ECHR. At the same time, the ECtHR has consistently established that not notifying 
(all) individuals of (secret) surveillance does not automatically amount to a breach of the ECHR, 
as long as the concerned individuals may seek effective remedies against the surveillance 
without needing to prove that they have been surveilled, i.e. without the information provided 
by the notification. Hence, the ECtHR found little issue with the surveillance regimes in Germany 
in Klass and Others v Germany (1978) and Weber and Saravia (2006) or, in the UK, in Kennedy 
v the United Kingdom (2010), but criticized the very limited or absent notification requirements 
under Russian and Hungarian laws, which prevented the concerned individuals from seeking 
(judicial) remedies in Zakharov (2015) and Szabo and Vissy (2016).
These judgements demonstrate that transparency, in contrast to the right to effective 
remedies, is less of a concern for the ECtHR where national security is at stake. However, the 
ECtHR rarely accepts that the complete absence of notification even in national security cases 
could be compatible with the ECHR. There is a development under way. Recently, individual 

--- Page 9 ---
ECtHR judges have begun emphasising that notification in the national security/intelligence 
sector should be provided whenever it would not jeopardise the fulfilment of the legitimate 
purposes behind the interception, even where individuals may exercise their right to effective 
remedies without such a notification.
Further to enabling the right to effective remedies, notification has an additional function: to 
enhance the accountability of the national security agencies. In 2015, the Council of Europe 
Venice Commission, in a report on the oversight of signal intelligence agencies, paid special 
attention to the role of the supervisory authorities in controlling the refusals to notify those 
individuals who had been subject to this type of surveillance. Its approach demonstrates the 
importance of notifications and its understanding of the reality that national security, and in 
our opinion also law enforcement, authorities might abusively neglect their notification duties. 
Referring to the German legal system, where an external oversight body (the G 10 Commission) 
approves each non-notification of surveillance by the surveillance authorities to the concerned 
individual, the Venice Commission pointed out that such an independent oversight mechanism 
can be an essential safeguard in the framework of (secret) surveillance and identifies a new 
purpose to the notification system: 
Thus the notification requirement, even if it only rarely leads to actual notification, 
can still serve a useful function in curbing overuse, because the strategic surveillance 
agency knows that every time the content of the communications of a citizen or 
resident has been monitored, it must inform the oversight body of this and convince 
it that its reasons for not subsequently notifying the person are justified.
Thus, a notification or access requirement, even when turned down by security or 
law enforcement authorities, still makes sense as a safeguard: in principle when it is 
elaborated in the right way (so that it forces these authorities to justify their decision 
to the oversight body), it has the advantage of making the security authorities more 
accountable towards the supervisory authorities and indirectly towards the citizens, 
when imposing restrictions. 
This short discussion of the notification case law of the ECtHR, joined to Section 2 on access 
to law enforcement data, allows us a brief intermediate conclusion: despite the fact that the 
ECtHR has not established the rights of access and notification as self-standing rights, it has 
made it clear that unconditional restrictions on them are not compatible with Articles 8 and 13 
ECHR and that where notification can be provided without jeopardising the concerned national 
security interest, it should ideally be provided. 
5.1 THE UNASKED QUESTION RAISED BY THE TRUTH BEHIND LEANDER 
In the case law discussed so far, the ECtHR has consistently established a requirement which 
influenced the rules on the right of access under the LED: restrictions on transparency, be it 
in the form of notification or the right of access, should be accompanied by the safeguard 

--- Page 10 ---
of independent oversight or even replaced by it in order to be compliant with the ECHR. For 
example, in Leander, the ECtHR concluded that, all in all, the non-disclosure of the file to Mr 
Leander constituted a proportionate restriction to Article 8 ECHR, in particular because of the 
system of review and oversight which, according to the ECtHR, offered adequate remedies.
This approach is not without risks. The ECtHR has sometimes been very superficial in examining 
the effectiveness and independence of the administrative supervisory authorities in its 
jurisprudence. We therefore question whether relying on supervisory bodies can be an adequate 
substitute for the direct right of access of the concerned individuals to the information (and 
documents) concerning themselves. 
Illustrative for the effectiveness of the Swedish oversight system is Leander (1987) or, better, 
what we learned after Leander. Reportedly, a decade after the ruling, the Swedish Government 
‘admitted that their case at the European Court for Human Rights had been based on false 
information’ and ‘publicly declared that Leander was not and never had been a security risk’,
in other words his registration and the associated data processing was illegal. More precisely, 
it was based on the expression of his political views as a teenager and treating people as a 
security threat for their political views was illegal under the Swedish Constitution.
And here comes a hypothetical question: had the Swedish Government in 1987 been honest with 
the ECtHR, would the ECtHR have ruled otherwise and acknowledged the importance of access 
to one’s file, either directly or through a security-cleared lawyer? The more disturbing question is: 
since the Government had engaged in illegal data processing, which was relatively straightforward 
and in practice not so difficult to detect, how had the oversight institutions not detected this 
abuse, and most importantly was the ECtHR wrong to conclude that the external control was 
really effective and independent in casu? Because if this is the case, then there is doubt as to 
whether effective supervision should be an unconditional alternative to an access right in principle, 
especially as a default procedure in law enforcement, and it can be questioned whether, in view of 
the risks, individuals should not have a vital interest in obtaining access to their file.
The circumstances of Leander do raise the question why the Leander-rule (non-access to the 
citizen can be remedied through a good oversight system) has been followed by the ECtHR 
in subsequent judgments. The reference to the Leander rule became so superficial that, at a 
certain point, the effectiveness and powers of the administrative supervisory authorities were 
not really examined.

--- Page 11 ---
5.2 LEANDER’S DÉJÀ VU AND THE POWERS OF THE FRENCH DATA 
PROTECTION SUPERVISORY AUTHORITY (CNIL)
This lack of profound scrutiny of powers and effectiveness of oversight bodies can be illustrated 
with Dalea v France (2010). The applicant, a Romanian citizen, was refused a Schengen visa 
by France. The ECtHR emphasized the presence of independent review in the French legal 
system, which was available through the indirect access procedure via the CNIL, as a safeguard 
in relation to the existence of the Schengen Information System (SIS) alert. In the ECtHR’s own 
reasoning, such a review should offer the opportunity to the individual to refute the information 
processed by the authorities. 
It is, however, unclear how the applicant could have realistically rebutted the information 
where no sufficient information was disclosed, in casu no information on the national security 
reasons for the inclusion in the SIS alert. The ECtHR acknowledged that the CNIL had indicated 
that the security authorities had not disclosed the content of the file even to the CNIL, but did 
not explore the matter further.
Dalea is interesting for two reasons: (i) the matter concerned the SIS, a system regulated by 
EU law in order to enhance the criminal law cooperation between the Member States, which in 
principle does not regulate national security matters as we mentioned in Section 2(2) above, 
but where nevertheless the EU Member States may enter alerts in relation to national security 
matters. This perfectly exemplifies the blurring of law enforcement and national security 
matters and the difficulty in delineating the transparency standards between the two; and (ii) 
in casu, the refusal to issue a Schengen visa could be treated as an implicit notification about 
an existing SIS alert, inviting Mr Dalea to exercise his right to administrative and/or judicial 
remedies. However, the case shows that this proved to be difficult without having access to 
the further information concerning the alert in the sense that Mr Dalea (and presumably his 
lawyers) could not refute the information contained in the alert by engaging in adversarial 
proceedings. 
5.3 THE WEAKNESSES OF JUDICIAL REVIEW WHEN ADMINISTRATIVE 
REVIEW IS RESTRICTED
In this subsection we will briefly dwell on the question raised by our analysis of Dalea, namely 
whether judicial oversight, especially in cases of insufficient administrative oversight, is an 
adequate guarantee to protect the affected human right, in this case the right to private life. 
The problems of judicial oversight when information is not disclosed to the concerned data 
subjects are evident from the Regner v the Czech Republic ruling, concerning the lack of access 
to the reasons for the applicant’s withdrawal of his security clearance, which was examined 
under the right to fair trial (Article 6 ECHR). The ruling itself had only a wafer-thin majority and 
gave rise to many dissenting and concurring Opinions, in which individual judges astutely raised 
the following points. 

--- Page 12 ---
Several judges argued that it is not the courts’ role to be the individual’s advocate and that if 
individuals do not have access to their data, then the courts might be misled by the security 
authorities which are in control of the information presented to the courts, whereas individuals 
cannot refute it. In other words, the courts cannot act independently. As another judge noted, 
the courts are not independent when they act in the interest of the parties to only one side 
of the dispute, that is when they either perform reviews on behalf of the applicant or base 
their judgement only on the information provided by one party. Even in the only Concurring 
Opinion, Judge Wojtyczek noted that ‘certain forms of “inequality of arms” cannot be offset in 
this way [through ‘the active role of the courts’].’
This somehow challenges the established case law that as long as an independent authority 
exists for examining the refusal to grant access (be it an administrative or judicial one), then 
the individual has had access to effective remedies granted by an independent authority.
The observations on the role of the courts also raise questions as to whether indirect access 
procedures, where the DPAs may be more influenced by the law enforcement authorities, 
offer the opportunity for independent legality control. It remains to be seen whether these 
observations will be taken up by the majority of the ECtHR. 
Based on the critical voices inside the ECtHR which reasonably question whether oversight 
should in principle replace direct access, even in national security cases, we argue that it might 
be problematic when a specific law enforcement legal system is based on an absolute ban on 
access and relies entirely on some version of external oversight as a safeguard, without proper 
powers to review and to give publicity to the findings to the concerned individuals.
6.1 A SHIFT IN TOLERANCE TOWARDS STATE RELIANCE ON ADMINISTRATIVE 
OVERSIGHT SOLUTIONS
This subsection examines, in particular, the judgment in Centrum för Rättvisa v Sweden, which 
suggests that supervisory authorities should be more accountable to the concerned individuals 
about their findings on the legality of the restrictions on one’s right to access and on the legality 
of the data processing by the national security or law enforcement authorities. A human 
rights-compatible system of administrative oversight is twofold: powers to review need to be 
complemented with powers to communicate about the review. Only then can the ideal of 
accountability towards citizens become a reality and indirect access legitimately be presented 
as an almost as good alternative to direct access.
The ECtHR, in Centrum för Rättvisa v Sweden (‘CFR’) (2021) – a case on the Swedish secret 
surveillance system – highlighted that individuals in Sweden could apply to an oversight 
body (the ‘supervisory authority’, or ‘FII’), asking it to examine the legality of the processing 
of personal data concerning them and carry out, when needed, the necessary rectifying 

--- Page 13 ---
measures. However, the concerned individuals were neither informed by the FII as to whether 
an interception had taken place, nor given a reasoned decision by the FII about whether 
infringements had been established. 
The ECtHR was clearly not convinced by this state of affairs, and made an interesting 
connection between this lack of transparency towards the individual by the oversight body 
and the overall effectiveness of the oversight body. The ECtHR pointed out that the supervisory 
authority might not always be encouraged to effectively check the legality of the processing, 
e.g. mistakes might be overlooked if the supervising authority is not required to be transparent 
about them.
Further, the ECtHR ruled that reasoned opinions, including opinions on why data indeed may 
not be disclosed or why there is a finding of infringement of the legality of processing, might 
also have wider societal benefits:
A reasoned decision has the undeniable advantage of providing publicly available 
guidance on the interpretation of the applicable legal rules, the limits to be observed 
and the manner in which the public interest and individual rights are to be balanced 
in the specific context of bulk interception of communications.
Thus, the publicity of the supervisory authorities’ findings could not only increase the 
effectiveness of the oversight system, but also increase the legal certainty, accessibility and 
foreseeability of the legal rules and contribute to the democratic debate on the work of the law 
enforcement and national security authorities, in addition to a more thorough control over the 
restrictions and transparency towards the individual concerned. 
When discussing these advantages of making the reasoned opinions public in Centrum för 
Rättvisa, the ECtHR referred to its similar reasoning in Kennedy v the United Kingdom (2010). 
In that case the ECtHR had examined the powers of the Investigatory Powers Tribunal (IPT), 
a (quasi) judicial authority under British law. The ECtHR positively noted, as a positive, that 
under British law the courts could decide to disclose ‘information regarding the findings of fact 
in his case’ where they deemed that no risk for national security exists. This implies that the 
ECtHR assesses it as positive that the available remedies could result in disclosure to the data 
subject, including by informing the data subject about the findings of illegality of the processing 
of their data. 
By contrast to Kennedy, the oversight body in Centrum för Rättvisa was a non-judicial supervisory 
authority (Inspectorate), which is mentioned alongside the Data Protection Supervisory 
Authority. The combined approach of the ECtHR in Centrum för Rättvisa and Kennedy could 
signal that the ECtHR might be starting to impose higher standards on such supervisory 

--- Page 14 ---
authorities and might expect them to perform like courts or other judicial authorities with 
their powers to review and render public the results of their review. This approach suggests 
that non-judicial bodies that serve as oversight bodies need to be entrusted with powers to 
motivate and publish their decisions, even in the national security context. It remains to be 
seen whether this trend will continue. If this would become the case, then it would make it 
difficult to defend a system of ‘indirect access’, as we know it in the LED and data protection 
laws in Member States that do not allow any disclosure to any individual in any case by the 
supervisory authorities, even where it concerns a minor crime of a person not even charged 
with a crime. 
New case law suggests that this trend, that started with Centrum för Rättvisa v Sweden, namely 
to look critically at the powers of non-judicial oversight mechanism,s is being continued. In 
Ekimdzhiev II (2022), concerning Bulgarian secret surveillance measures and their oversight 
mechanism, the ECtHR mentioned that one of the criteria for assessing the effectiveness of the 
supervisory authorities is ‘the possibility of effective public scrutiny of those authorities’ work’.
However, it did not specify what this public scrutiny means in casu, i.e. whether it involves the 
publication of its decisions where it found a violation of the lawfulness of a surveillance measure 
in a certain case and the refusal of the authorities to provide information to the concerned 
individuals. It did, however, pay attention to the number of actual notifications ordered by the 
supervisory authority and concluded that they were far too few, especially in comparison to the 
number of applications for access.
This requirement that governments have to demonstrate the effectiveness of the oversight 
measures was already mentioned in Zakharov and Szabo and Vissy, although even after 
Ekimdzhiev II it is still not clear what the ECtHR means with effectiveness in this context, e.g. 
does it also mean the opportunity for the supervisory authority to independently decide to 
disclose information to the concerned data subjects? 
By way of a short conclusion, we would bring to mind the fact that the above powers of the 
administrative supervisory authorities were discussed in the framework of the notification of 
secret surveillance for national security purposes. We note that the notification ‘only’ reveals 
that a surveillance measure has taken place and hence keeping it secret might be essential 
for national security. By contrast, the right of access to one’s data in the criminal law context 
is often requested once individuals are aware that their data have been processed for law 
enforcement purposes, for instance because charges have been raised against a certain 
individual who wants to have more details about the collected information. Depending on 
each individual case, providing the further information might or might not be critical for the 
effectiveness of the investigations and it could be argued that some cases might warrant more 
transparency about the data processing and the findings of the legality of the processing. It is 
exactly in examining the right balance in each individual case that the independent oversight 
authorities are needed and need to have effective powers.
6.2 CASE LAW ON COMMUNIST FILES (HARALAMBIE, JARNEA, TUDOR AND 
SZULC)
The importance of independent decision-making over the disclosure or restrictions on 
disclosure of information to the concerned data subjects was also pointed out by the ECtHR in 
a somewhat different context, namely access to one’s file compiled by the former Communist 
regimes. Even though these were not designed to be remedial and supervisory authorities like 
the Member State DPAs under the LED, some of the points raised by the ECtHR in that context 
could also be relevant for these DPAs. 

--- Page 15 ---
As to the Romanian regime on disclosure of the Communist files, the ECtHR in Haralambie 
(2009), Jarnea (2012) and Antoneta Tudor (2013) indirectly criticized the lack of independence 
of the authority (National Council for the Study of the Archives of the Securitate (CNSAS)) 
tasked with providing access to individuals to their files. Since the files were initially held by the 
Security and Defence Ministries, these were supposed to provide the CNSAS with the requested 
files, which would then provide the concerned citizen access to these files. In practice, the 
security authorities would not always disclose the requested files to the CNSAS on time, which 
could then not fulfil its transparency obligations.
The supervisory authority’s need for unrestricted access to the information it supervises is 
essential for fulfilling its tasks effectively. This requirement has been emphasized by the ECtHR, 
particularly in the context of national security.
In addition, in relation to the Romanian regime, the ECtHR criticized the fact that the affected 
individuals could not take the security services, in casu the Defence Ministry, to court for not 
disclosing the files to the CNSAS, as the Defence Ministry lacked standing in court under the 
applicable Romanian law.
(Indirect) influence over the decision-making concerning information disclosure is another 
issue, as evident in Szulc v Poland (2012), about the Polish authorities’ refusal, for more than ten 
years, to grant a woman – who denied any collaboration with the security services during the 
communist era – access to all documents about her collected by those services. The ECtHR held 
that the new post-communist regime had failed to put in place an effective procedure whereby 
interested parties could obtain access to security service documents concerning themselves. 
The ECtHR observed that the abolished authoritarian regime in Poland had categorized the 
concerned persons into collaborator, informant, etc. The oversight body (the Polish Institute 
of National Remembrance) responsible for examining access requests to the files had 
automatically taken over these classifications with the restrictions on access defined by the 
former regime. Clearly the oversight body could not or did not want to decide independently 
on the restrictions.
These judgments with regard to access by the concerned citizens to files compiled by the 
abolished Communist regimes confirm the new trend with regard to oversight as discussed 
in subsection 6.1 on surveillance case law: the ECtHR only accepts the guarantee of having 
an oversight body when certain minimum requirements are met with regard to their review 
powers, and their obligations with regards to the publicity of the outcome of their review, 
bringing to mind the requirement for independence of Member State DPAs.
Let us now return to EU law and the three Member State laws which we examined in our two 
previous papers, as referred to at the beginning of the present paper. We argue that examining 
these against the background of the ECtHR is an important exercise, despite the fact that the 
three laws are the result of the implementation of the EU LED. De jure, challenges about the 
LED and the implementation laws should be raised before the CJEU with its powers to review 

--- Page 16 ---
implementing acts, but this does not exclude a subsequent procedure before the ECtHR, i.e. 
after the CJEU has given its preliminary ruling on the subject matter and the highest national 
court has rendered a final judgement. An individual who is not satisfied with such a ruling and 
who strives for more transparency by a certain DPA, could challenge the DPA’s refusal to grant 
them access to their data based on the Member State LED implementing law, in front of the 
ECtHR, which could result in damages being paid to the applicant. Thus, in this section we will 
apply the above case law on the restrictions, to the powers of the DPAs in Belgium, France and 
Germany to conduct their legality review and communicate their findings to the concerned 
data subjects under the Article 17(3) LED ‘indirect access’ procedure, which, as we argued in 
our earlier work, has been envisaged to be the exception under the LED, the default procedure 
being direct access as directly provided by the law enforcement authority to the requesting 
data subject.
In Belgium, the legal system is based on a general ban on direct access to personal data 
processed by the police. This ban applies to the disclosure both by the police authorities and 
by the supervisory data protection authority (‘COC’). In effect, the COC may not disclose any 
data to the requesting data subjects, nor even confirm that the data of the individual are being 
processed. The direct access procedure is simply non-existent and automatically replaced 
by the possibility of turning to the COC. This ‘indirect access’ procedure is formally supposed 
to fulfil the ECtHR requirement of independent oversight. However, we argue that this is not 
quite the case. Indeed, the ECtHR ‘approved’ a system in which direct access is replaced by 
independent oversight. However, it did so in particular in the national security context, whereas 
the implementing law in Belgium makes no distinction between national security matters and 
more trivial police matters. In addition, the law does not allow a distinction to be made between 
the individual cases, in the sense that it does not require an assessment to be performed on the 
individual risk posed by the potential disclosure of the personal data of a specific individual, e.g. 
in the context of minor crimes or of acquitted individuals. 
On a related matter, the ECtHR ‘gave the green light’ to the replacement by independent 
oversight especially when it comes to notification (of secret surveillance). As we noted in 
Section 2 above, in the law enforcement sector, when individuals are charged with crime, for 
instance, they are essentially notified of the data processing and it might be the case that 
disclosing further information about the data processing, depending on the case, might not be 
critical. The fact that the ECtHR has acknowledged that, even in certain national security cases, 
a notification can be provided means that it cannot be deemed proportionate that in all law 
enforcement matters no notification or further access to the data can be provided, especially by 
an independent authority which is supposed to independently balance the competing interests 
at stake. Another disturbing observation is that this general ban on the COC is not restricted in 
time, such as for the duration of an ongoing investigation.
We note that these absolute and indiscriminate restrictions on the right of access apply to 
the independent supervisory authority (COC). Thus, we can safely conclude that its decision-
making power at this point is illusory. The disturbing fact is that the COC does not have to 
balance the interests of the law enforcement tasks and those of the concerned individuals, nor 
is the COC obliged to justify its decisions, even to inform innocent individuals that their data 
have been processed illegally and have been deleted, where it has found the data processing 
illegal. This might make its control over the police more lenient and less accountable to the 
concerned individuals and the public, a problem which has been criticized by the ECtHR in 
more recent case law, in which the ECtHR looked more closely at the effectiveness of the 

--- Page 17 ---
independent (administrative) oversight. The situation also implies that de facto and de jure
the police authorities are not obliged to justify the refusal of access to the COC, which in turn 
cannot assess the legality of the restriction and grant transparency when no law enforcement 
interest can be prejudiced by the disclosure.
Furthermore, we saw that the ECtHR pays serious attention to the right to effective remedies 
in general. Indeed, it tended to find restrictions on the right to notification in national security 
cases, i.e. in very limited cases, where individuals could seek effective remedies, compatible 
with the ECHR. It remains questionable whether the restrictions on the transparency of the 
COC in the law enforcement field offer an effective judicial review. Assuming that individuals 
may formally turn to the courts and theoretically challenge the data processing by the law 
enforcement authority, we argue that it is difficult to contest the information and the legality 
of its processing if the concerned individuals have not been granted access to the data as 
processed by that authority. We saw that effective judicial review is a consistent requirement 
by the ECtHR, especially in cases where individuals do not obtain full access to the requested 
information, but there are unanswered questions on important details. How the ECtHR would 
reason on this in theory, can therefore not be claimed with certainty. Doubts about effective 
non-judicial and effective judicial review in Belgium exemplify our criticism that the mere 
existence of oversight mechanisms cannot be an effective safeguard if the oversight authorities 
are not independent from the law enforcement authorities and do not have any possibility of 
granting actual access to the data (see Sections 5 and 6).
Contrary to the situation in Belgium, the indirect access procedures in France and Germany are 
not phrased in law as the only procedure for access, but problematic aspects under the ECHR 
and the case law of the ECtHR remain. This is mostly due to the fact that the DPAs in both 
Member States might not always be able to overturn the decision to refuse access taken by the 
law enforcement authorities, which signals a lack of detachment from the law enforcement 
authorities with which they operate. In most cases, the DPAs are allowed to disclose information 
to the concerned data subjects about the processing of their data only after the authority which 
processes the data has given its approval for the disclosure, lacking criteria when such ‘approval’ 
may be withheld. As a result, the DPAs are not able to effectively address the grievances of 
the data subject in relation to the non-disclosure, especially where the non-disclosure is 
assessed as illegal by the DPAs. Also, they might become too influenced by the opinions of the 
law enforcement authorities and may end up simply rubber-stamping their refusals, acting in 
the interest only of these authorities, which has been deemed problematic by ECtHR judges.
Similar to what we noticed in the Belgian case, we observe that the restrictions on the effective 
supervision and accountability of the DPAs about their supervisory work to the concerned 
individuals are quite indiscriminate and might lead to unjustified restrictions on transparency, 
again where no law enforcement interest would be prejudiced by the disclosure and no national 
security interest is at stake. The situation creates a déjà vu with Leander (see Sections 2.1 and 
5.1 and 5.2), where the mere existence of administrative supervisory bodies did not manage to 
curb abuse, consisting in the illegal processing, which remained in the dark for years.
We argue that the situation created by the French and German laws also has parallels with the 
situation with the (non)-disclosure of the Communist files in Romania and Poland, where the 
administrative bodies tasked with deciding on the disclosure were prevented from effectively 

--- Page 18 ---
doing so, even where disclosure should have been granted, because of the lack of cooperation 
from the authorities which were supposed to give their approval.
We also cannot be sure that the German DPAs can effectively hold the German law enforcement 
authorities accountable for their non-compliance with the data protection laws, because of 
the provision in German law that sometimes the data may not even be provided for review to 
the DPAs if the highest national security authority blocks this disclosure. We notice that the 
provision refers to national security, where in general the ECtHR has been more lenient on the 
restrictions to transparency. However, a common sense argument is that this situation does not 
lead to effective administrative supervision over the processing of personal data when these are 
exchanged between the police and the national security agencies. We are worried, however, 
that in light of Dalea, the ECtHR might be ‘pacified’ if effective judicial redress is available. 
In general, when discussing judicial redress, we doubt whether the French and German courts, 
similar to the DPAs, can be truly impartial if the individuals cannot state their case for which 
they would need additional information via the right of access to their data. We would draw 
attention here to the opinions of individual judges that, in such situations, the courts risk taking 
sides, either because they are influenced by the law enforcement authorities which dispose of 
more information, or because they decide to act as the lawyers of data subjects to rectify the 
information asymmetry. The other problem, which has emerged in practice in Germany, is whether 
the courts can perform a proper judicial review, especially if the courts do not always obtain the 
necessary information from the law enforcement authorities to examine a certain case.
The previous analysis of indirect access procedures in these three countries demonstrates that 
exceptions to transparency for the data subjects, including via the intermediary of the DPAs, are 
broadly phrased and do not allow the DPAs to independently decide, on a case-by-case basis, 
what level of transparency about the data processing and about the findings about the legality 
of the processing should be granted to the data subjects. DPAs are simply not free to assess 
the impact of these restrictions on the human rights of the concerned data subjects and to be 
the effective safeguard which the ECtHR has claimed they should be. Unfortunately, we note 
that only recently has the ECtHR paid closer attention to the effectiveness of the oversight and it 
remains to be seen which path it will take in the future: whether it will pay more attention to the 
effectiveness of oversight, or whether it will find it compatible with the ECHR if such authorities 
simply exist. It also remains to be seen what criteria the ECtHR will develop for the ‘effectiveness’ 
of the supervisory authorities and what limits to their effectiveness/independence will be deemed 
compatible with the ECHR. Hence, we are careful about establishing the ECtHR as a standard 
on effective supervision over the restrictions on transparency. Nevertheless, we can claim with 
certainty that the discussed implementing laws are highly likely to be problematic under the ECHR.
Recently, the French legal provisions on ‘indirect access’ triggered 17 joint complaints with 
the ECtHR. The subject of the challenge was the 2015 French law on indirect access to the 

--- Page 19 ---
files concerning national and public security and defence. The complaints can be broadly 
summarized as referring to the impossibility or difficulty for the applicants to obtain access to 
their data as collected by the French law enforcement/security authorities.
Three applicants in particular challenged in a straightforward way the French indirect access 
procedure, as made possible under the LED, claiming its incompatibility with Articles 8 and 
13 ECHR, because the legality check by the supervisory body in France (the CNIL) does not 
guarantee an effective procedure for the legality control over the processing, since only the 
concerned data subjects are in a position to assess the accuracy of the processed data.
The applicants also claimed that the French legal framework does not offer any access, 
rectification and contestation opportunities as concerns the data to which access was sought 
in breach of Article 8, and also of Articles 6 and 13 ECHR. On the point of judicial remedies, the 
question was raised as to what scope the judicial review by the Council of State should have: 
should this administrative court be able to examine the classification of the information as 
secret and examine the authorities’ decision not to disclose the information to the data subject 
and be able to order the de-classification of the information?
We note that the answer to this last question could also clarify the question of what an 
effective remedy in non-disclosure cases, especially where the indirect access procedure 
applies, under Article 13 ECHR should look like, as this is not very evident from the ECtHR’s case 
law. Although the European Court of Human Rights (ECtHR) has determined that, in principle, 
the right to effective remedies should provide adversarial proceedings, it is debatable whether 
the protection of this right can be guaranteed if individuals do not have access to the necessary 
information to present their case. Additionally, concerns arise when domestic courts are 
unable to grant relief, including the disclosure of information for a proper assessment of 
restrictions, due to limitations within the legal framework that prohibit such disclosures.
It will be interesting to see whether the ECtHR in these French cases will be strict in assessing 
the role of the domestic courts in non-disclosure cases, especially whether the courts can act 
as an effective and neutral safeguard against abusive restrictions. 
With the expansion of the data processing network of law enforcement authorities and the 
increasing interest of individuals in obtaining access to the data stored about them by these 
authorities, it remains important to understand what the right of access to one’s personal data 
actually constitutes and under what conditions it may be (entirely) replaced by a system of 
independent administrative oversight. 

--- Page 20 ---
We studied the applicable case law of the ECtHR on the right of access and its requirements 
on notification in surveillance cases, including on the requirements on independent oversight 
when access and notification are restricted. This paper thus adds, with its comprehensive 
analysis of human rights law, to our previous work which provided a holistic reading of the 
LED and EU primary law on the topic. The analysis in the present paper reveals that there are 
small but meaningful developments in the case law of the ECtHR. Also, there are developments 
with regard to a duty of governments to notify an individual, at a certain point, that there has 
been surveillance or other kind of data collection. The right of access to one’s data has a longer 
standing in the case law but complementing it with a right for the concerned individuals to be 
notified when the security or law enforcement interests allow it, is more than welcome. More 
precisely, the ECtHR has indicated that it is important to notify individuals of the surveillance 
measures when the notification cannot prejudice the concerned national security interest. There 
is no longer any room in recent case law for a system of absolute restrictions on information 
to be provided to the concerned data subjects (e.g. Centrum för Rättvisa, Ekimdzhiev II, and
Kennedy). Together, access and notification as sub-rights of Article 8 (one could equally defend 
the thesis that both are sub-rights or even essential components of the Article 13 right to an 
effective remedy) contribute to more transparency for the individual and for society. We saw 
that this transparency is not beneficial for its own sake only: it can also contribute to a higher 
level of legality of personal data processing through the increased accountability of the law 
enforcement and security authorities.
Access and notification, however, are not absolute (sub-) rights. For practical reasons, access 
(and notification) might often be refused, for instance for the fulfilment of legitimate law 
enforcement purposes. However, the requirement to inform a supervisory body that can 
review the decision of security and law enforcement authorities not to disclose the requested 
information makes more sense and contributes to an accountable set of safeguards with an 
individual and collective dimension, as does the power of oversight bodies to communicate to 
the individual and to society about their findings after review.
One of the central questions in this paper is whether oversight should replace transparency 
rights such as access (and notification): can a right, such as the right to access, always and, if 
so, under what conditions, be replaced by an oversight mechanism of independent supervisory 
authorities? This question is relevant both under the EU legal order under the LED and under the 
ECtHR because both legal orders envisage to different degrees such a ‘replacement’. 
Older case law of the ECtHR, such as Leander, seems to be re-oriented by more recent case 
law showing more nuance and less naiveté (especially in Centrum för Rättvisa v Sweden 
and Ekimdzhiev II). Oversight procedures need to have real added value, especially when 
they replace direct transparency between law enforcement (or security) authorities and the 
individual. To a degree, this new sensitivity plays out for both non-judicial and judicial review: 
no access by an oversight body to the data, no powers to demand data and no powers to 
(independently decide whether to) communicate about the findings of the legality review to 
the concerned individuals weakens the position of the oversight body both under Article 8 and 
Article 13 ECHR. It also weakens the position of the concerned individuals, who might be left 
‘at the mercy’ of the law enforcement and supervisory authorities if they are not informed at 
least of the findings of the legality check and cannot state their case in courts in order to have 
their claims examined by a court in adversarial proceedings where the courts remain neutral 
and are not disproportionately influenced by the party holding the data which thus possesses 
more information than the individuals. 
Three lessons can be learned when the human rights acquis on access as constructed by 
the ECtHR is applied to indirect access procedures in Belgium, France and Germany. First, 
absolute restrictions on ‘direct’ access, as is the case in Belgium, are hardly acceptable under 
the ECtHR case law. Second, the provisions in the laws of the three examined Member States 
which either completely ban the supervisory authority from disclosing any information on the 
legality check (Belgium) or making this communication dependent on the law enforcement 
and national security authorities (France and Germany) are clearly problematic for the ECtHR. 
This is especially so because the supervisory authorities might become too lenient towards 
the law enforcement authorities and rubber-stamp their decisions. In addition, the supervisory 
authorities might be too influenced by the law enforcement authorities, whereas the individuals 

--- Page 21 ---
who do not have access to the data to contest it might remain unrepresented. Third, we quoted 
examples from the legal framework and practice in the three countries which pose doubts as 
to whether individuals may exercise their right to effective judicial remedies in relation to their 
right of access.
Considering that many access requests to personal data in the law enforcement context are 
likely to involve minor crimes and not pose issues for national security, unlike most of the 
national security cases cited above, and noting that Member States have a smaller margin 
of appreciation in the law enforcement field compared to national security, it is anticipated 
that the ECtHR’s critical stance on these issues will be upheld. The ECtHR may even establish 
additional conditions regarding the effectiveness and independence of administrative oversight, 
particularly concerning minor crimes, when examining the strict necessity of the restrictions.
Finally, the present contribution has not gone into the matter of comparing judicial oversight 
with administrative oversight. In terms of independence, the former is superior but there might 
be reasons in a specific case to work with the latter or with a combination of the two.
Paul De Hert contributed to the present paper in the framework of his participation into the iBOF 
Project (Future-proofing human rights. Developing thicker forms of accountability). The paper 
has also been inspired by Diana Dimitrova’s PhD dissertation at the Vrije Universiteit Brussel 
(Diana Dimitrova, ‘Data Subject Rights: The Rights to Access and Rectification in the Area of 
Freedom, Security and Justice’, VUB PhD Dissertation, 2021).
Diana Dimitrova 
orcid.org/0000-0003-4732-7054
FIZ Karlsruhe – Leibniz Institute for Information Infrastructures GmbH, Germany; Vrije Universiteit Brussel, 
LSTS Group, Belgium
Paul De Hert 
orcid.org/0000-0003-4084-6898
Vrije Universiteit Brussel, Belgium; Tilburg University, Netherlands
TO CITE THIS ARTICLE:
Diana Dimitrova and Paul 
de Hert, ‘Real Transparency 
and Real Oversight of Law 
Enforcement Data. The ECHR 
and the Lack of Accountability 
of Indirect Access Procedures’ 
(2025) 21(1) Utrecht Law 
Review 49–69. DOI: https://doi.
org/10.36633/ulr.905
Published: 01 September 2025
COPYRIGHT:
© 2025 The Author(s). This is an 
open-access article distributed 
under the terms of the Creative 
Commons Attribution 4.0 
International License (CC-BY 
4.0), which permits unrestricted 
use, distribution, and 
reproduction in any medium, 
provided the original author 
and source are credited. See 
http://creativecommons.org/
licenses/by/4.0/.
Utrecht Law Review is a peer-
reviewed open access journal 
published by Utrecht University 
School of Law.
