
--- Page 1 ---
The federated learning (FL) principle ensures multiple clients jointly develop a machine 
learning model without exchanging their local data. Various government enacted prohibi­
tion policies on data exchange between organizations have led to the need for privacy-
preserved federated learning. Many industries have cultivated this idea of model develop­
ment through federated learning to enhance performance and accuracy. This paper offers a 
detailed overview of the background of FL, highlighting existing aggregation algorithms, 
frameworks, implementation aspects, and dataset repositories, establishing itself as an 
essential reference for researchers in the field. The paper thoroughly reviews existing 
centralized and decentralized FL approaches proposed in the literature and gives an over­
view about the methodology, privacy techniques implemented and limitations to guide 
other researchers to advance their research in the field of federated learning. The paper 
discusses the critical role of privacy-enhancing technologies like differential privacy (DP), 
homomorphic encryption (HE), and secure multiparty computation (SMPC) in federated 
learning highlighting their effectiveness in safeguarding sensitive data while optimizing 
the balance between privacy, communication efficiency, and computational cost. The pa­
per explores the applications of federated learning in privacy-sensitive areas like natural 
language processing (NLP), healthcare, and Internet of Things (IoT) with edge computing. 
We believe our work provides a novel addition by identifying privacy evaluation metrics 
and spotlighting the measures in terms of data privacy and correctness, communication 
cost, computational cost and scalability. Furthermore, it identifies emerging challenges and 
suggests promising research directions in the federated learning domain.
Decentralized · Blockchain

--- Page 2 ---
The advent of recent streams of artificial intelligence (AI), machine learning (ML), Internet 
of Things (IoT), etc., has driven a vast amount of data accumulation called big data. These 
data have been applied to streams such as transportation, industry, agriculture, healthcare, 
and so on. Organizations take valuable insights from these data to better understand user 
behavior, which helps them grow their customer base and boost profits. For example, banks 
evaluate customers based on their loan and credit card history, companies analyze user data 
collected from wearable watches to develop health-related applications, and retail com­
panies increase their business by utilizing recommendation systems that predict based on 
browsing and shopping patterns. Building an AI or ML model requires integrating data from 
several sources. However, obtaining this kind of data could be costly and time-consuming. 
Meanwhile, specific policies prohibit data exchange between organizations due to increased 
privacy and data security expectations. For instance, the US government enacted the Health 
Insurance Portability and Accountability Act (HIPAA) to prevent hospitals, insurance com­
panies, and healthcare providers from accessing private and sensitive patient data. The 
General Data Protection Regulation (GDPR), enacted by the European Union, prohibits 
institutions and organizations from using users’ personal data without consent (Khan et al. 
2023). The GDPR states that operators must have user agreements and cannot manipulate 
users into sacrificing their privacy. Operators are also not allowed to train models with­
out the user’s consent (Albrecht 2016). Similarly, network providers are prohibited from 
destroying or disclosing personal data by China’s General Security Law (Zhang et al. 2021). 
It emphasizes that network operators are not allowed to reveal, alter, or destroy the personal 
data they gather. Before proceeding with any data transactions with the third party, ensur­
ing that the proposed contract clearly defines the scope of the data to be shared and the data 
protection criteria (Parasol 2018) is imperative. Countries like Argentina’s Personal Data 
Protection Act (PDPA), Japan’s Act on the Protection of Personal Information (APPI), and 
Canada’s Personal Information Protection and Electronic Documents Act (PIPEDA), etc. to 
name a few are strict laws that protect data privacy in their respective international organi­
zations or countries (Li et al. 2023a). The implementation of these laws helps in preventing 
data leaks and advancing security. These guidelines aid in safeguarding user data while 
creating difficulties for the training of AI or ML models.
To address these training difficulties, Google proposed the federated learning concept, 
which takes place across a federation of dispersed learners in the system using locally 
stored data for model training. Federated learning minimizes the costs and privacy con­
cerns related to traditional centralized machine learning methods by following two funda­
mental principles: local computing and model transfer. Every learner in federated learning 
can improve their local model without having direct access to other learners’ private data. 
Federated learning (FL) is a machine learning environment where several clients exchange 
training updates with each other to develop a high-performing centralized model. Here, each 
client’s learning algorithm updates the local model with its local data in each round of FL. 
The clients subsequently send the update to server, which combines the client updates to 
produce a global model.
FL has emerged as a crucial framework in the age of data-driven innovation, address­
ing the growing need for privacy-focused machine learning. Unlike traditional methods 
that rely on centralized data aggregation for training models, FL eliminates the associated 

--- Page 3 ---
privacy risks, regulatory hurdles, and security challenges-especially relevant in sensitive 
fields like healthcare, finance, and IoT. Instead, FL enables models to be trained directly 
on decentralized data stored across multiple devices or institutions, eliminating the neces­
sity to transfer sensitive data to a central server. This decentralized approach enhances data 
privacy, ensures compliance with regulations such as GDPR, and reduces communication 
overhead by utilizing edge computing. Additionally, FL fosters collaborative model training 
across diverse datasets, improving both generalization and fairness while maintaining data 
sovereignty. As data volumes and sensitivity continue to grow, FL offers an effective and 
scalable solution to balance the demands of privacy and performance in modern AI systems.
FL is designed to protect data privacy by training models on distributed data without 
centralized aggregation. However, the inherent structure of FL still exposes vulnerabili­
ties, such as information leakage through model updates, membership inference attacks, 
and gradient inversion techniques. This necessitates the development and evaluation of 
robust privacy-preserving mechanisms and assessing the effectiveness of these mechanisms 
requires well-defined metrics to quantify privacy guarantees without compromising model 
performance. The motivation behind this survey paper is to consolidate existing privacy 
techniques and metrics, offering a comprehensive resource for researchers and practitioners. 
It helps identify and highlights challenges in balancing privacy, efficiency, and accuracy, 
and sets the stage for future research in securing FL systems. Providing information for the 
growing adoption of FL in sensitive domains like healthcare, natural language processing 
(NLP), and IoT, understanding privacy trade-offs and advancements is crucial for ensuring 
safe and trustworthy deployment of federated systems.
1.1  Positioning our work among existing FL research
Several surveys have been conducted to examine federated learning (FL) from various 
perspectives, each emphasizing different aspects, challenges, or application domains. For 
example, Zhang et al. (2021) reviewed the evolution of FL and provided an overview of 
existing research based on data partitioning, privacy, machine learning models, communica­
tion architecture, and heterogeneity. It also briefly analyzed current real-world applications 
of FL. Similarly, Khan et al. (2023) introduced a taxonomy for FL, highlighted key consider­
ations, identified factors crucial for ensuring privacy, and discussed the primary techniques 
utilized. Additionally, they summarized the various application domains of FL. The article 
(Li et al. 2023a) provides a thorough analysis of the application and security of federated 
learning in healthcare. It provides insights into applications in the medical domain using 
a federated aggregation approach. It analyses security of FL, presents privacy-preserving 
techniques of FL. The authors (Gabrielli et al. 2023) provide detailed information on decen­
tralized FL solutions that enable FL clients to collaborate and communicate without a cen­
tral server, and also concentrated on the crucial problems of the centralized orchestration in 
traditional FL client–server architecture. They categorized existing approaches into distrib­
uted computing and blockchain-based approaches. The paper (Liu et al. 2024) is yet another 
survey on blockchain-enabled FL that introduced the fundamental concepts of blockchain 
and FL while exploring their interrelationship. Additionally, it offers an in-depth analysis of 
FL system architectures, covering the various layers like infrastructure, algorithm, network, 
communication, blockchain consensus, and application and it discusses the current state of 
research. Sameera et al. (2024) examined the scientific community’s research attempts to 

--- Page 4 ---
define privacy solutions in implementing Blockchain-Enabled FL situations. They provided 
a thorough overview of the history of FL and Blockchain, assessed current architectures for 
their compatibility, and listed the main threats and potential defences to ensure privacy in 
their environment. Table 1 presents a comparison of key topics covered in related survey 
articles along with our contributions. This comparison highlights how our survey can assist 
both academic researchers and industry professionals in understanding existing theories and 
techniques aimed at enhancing FL performance in both centralized and decentralized set­
tings. Unlike previous surveys, our work not only explores privacy-enhancing techniques 
but also provides an understanding of various privacy metrics for performance evaluation. 
By providing a comprehensive overview of the current landscape, this survey serves as a 
valuable resource for gaining insights, understanding emerging trends, and guiding future 
advancements in the field of FL.
1.2  Contribution and structure of the article
The contributions of this paper are multifaceted and provide significant insights into the 
evolving field of FL. (1) Provides a comprehensive background on FL and associated chal­
lenges. (2) In-depth discussion on privacy-preserving techniques highlighting their trade-offs 
and applicability in FL systems. (3) Categorizing existing FL architectures into centralized 
and decentralized models, evaluating their strengths and limitations. (4) Explores FL appli­
cations across multiple domains, emphasizing practical implementations and potential chal­
lenges. (5) Analysis of privacy and performance trade-offs using various evaluation metrics, 
focusing data privacy and correctness, resistance to attacks, computational and communica­
tion overhead and scalability of FL systems.
The structure of this paper is organized as follows. Section 2 gives the background and 
preliminaries of federated learning, covering its fundamental principles, classification, 
aggregation algorithms, benchmark frameworks, and key challenges. Section 3 explores the 

--- Page 5 ---
significance of privacy protection in FL and examines essential technologies employed to 
safeguard user data. Section 4 summarizes the existing literature review based on the archi­
tecture of FL namely centralized and decentralized FL. Section 5 discusses the applications 
of FL across various domains, including natural language processing (NLP), healthcare, 
IoT, and edge computing. In Sect. 6, we discuss privacy and performance analysis with vari­
ous metric considerations. Sectios 7 and 8 outlines the future scope and provide concluding 
remarks.
In this section, we present the concepts of federated learning, its categorization in terms of 
architecture, federation scale and data distribution across sampled feature space, and also 
aggregation algorithms and benchmark frameworks.
2.1  Federated learning
Federated learning is an environment where several clients can work together to train mod­
els using their local data and only exchange the training parameters required to achieve 
the learning goal, maintaining the privacy of their original data, as illustrated in Fig. 1. 
This configuration guarantees the privacy of each client’s data while enabling dispersed 

--- Page 6 ---
data training. With federated learning, multiple participants, P , . . . , P , are chosen to 
train the machine learning model M without aggregating their individual data D , . . . , D
. Together, they create the model M , which has δ performance. In contrast, tradi­
tional machine learning with multiple participants would require aggregating all of the data 
together, D = D
∪ D
∪ · · · ∪ D , to train model M , which would have a perfor­
mance of δ . The accuracy loss in FL is represented by delta (δ), where δ is a positive 
real number, and it holds that |δ − δ | < δ (Nagar 2019). In each round of FL, w
to w denote the weights of the n clients, while w represents the global model’s weight.
The following steps constitute the fundamentals of multi-party collaborative modeling 
in FL: 
1.	 Client selection: The server keeps track of potential client to client , which are usu­
ally edge servers, IoT devices, or smartphones. The server chooses k node clients from 
a collection of clients that satisfy the requirements for the FL process.
Weights and biases in the model are established via random initialization or through 
pre-training with the available global dataset. This initial model M is sent to every 
selected client by the server.
3.	 Client local training: Among the k clients chosen by the server, each client , where 
1 ≤ i ≤ n will use its local data to train the initial model locally. It will then use the 
gradient descent technique to optimize the learning model, encrypt it, and share the 
updated model with the server.
validated, and the lagging updates are removed and then aggregated to create the global 
model M .
5.	 Model update: For the current round j, the cumulative update U of k clients is com­
piled and distributed to the chosen clients in the subsequent round as the global model.
The above outlined step 3 to 5 is repeated until the loss function reaches convergence.
2.2  Categories of federated machine learning
Figure 2 illustrates the classification of FL, primarily based on three key aspects. Firstly 
based on the system’s architecture, FL is categorized primarily into two approaches: central­
ized and decentralized. In a centralized approach, a central entity serves as the orchestrator 
in the client–server fashion. The central server is in charge of selecting clients for model 
training, creating a global model by merging local models, and broadcasting model param­
eters to all parties. It is also termed synchronous FL architecture, whereas, in the decentral­
ized approach, there is no separate role as server or client. At each round, each client can 
aggregate the local models and broadcast global model parameters to other clients.
Secondly, FL systems fall into two categories: cross-device and cross-silo, based on the 
federation scale. Cross-device FL systems consist of numerous mobile devices with diverse 
processing capabilities, where the model is distributed to the clients and trained on local 
data during the training phase (Gabrielli et al. 2023). Nevertheless, FL is equally effec­
tive in cross-silo scenarios, in which the number of federated clients is often low, but their 
computing capacity is high, typically found in large enterprises or data centers. In this, the 

--- Page 7 ---
local model is combined with data centers and data silos to create a global model. Lastly, 
FL is divided into three types based on how data is distributed across the sample and fea­
ture spaces: horizontal federated learning, vertical federated learning, and federated transfer 
learning, as shown in Fig. 3.
●

--- Page 8 ---
mension, and the part of the datasets that has similar user attributes but differs in users 
is considered for training.
●
mension, and the part of the datasets that have similar users but differing user attributes 
is considered for training.
●
transfer learning is utilized to overcome the absence of data or tags.
2.3  Aggregation algorithms
In FL, aggregation algorithms are essential for combining updates from multiple decentral­
ized clients into a global model without sharing raw data. These algorithms ensure that the 
global model improves over time while maintaining the privacy of individual clients. Every 
training iteration in FL is as illustrated in Fig. 4, where a global model update is obtained by 
aggregating all of the local model updates.
There are several aggregation approaches like average aggregation, where server aver­
ages the received updates from clients, clipped average aggregation which is similar to 
average aggregation, but outlier updates are clipped to reduce the influence of malicious 
or abnormal updates. Momentum aggregation helps to speed up model convergence and 
bayesian aggregation uses inference to account for uncertainty in client updates, improving 
model generalizability. Secure aggregation incorporates cryptographic methods to ensure 
client data privacy where as quantization aggregation reduces the size of model updates by 
compressing them before transmission to enhance efficiency. Hierarchical aggregation is 
performed at multiple hierarchical levels, reducing communication overhead and personal­
ized aggregation considers the specific data characteristics of each client, ensuring personal­
ized updates. Table 2 and 3 lists the widely used aggregation algorithms and strategies in FL 
and highlights its outcomes.
2.4  Benchmark framework details
Federated Learning benchmark frameworks are essential for progressing the field of FL 
and facilitating the creation of effective, efficient, and robust FL algorithms. They offer 
standardized datasets, metrics, and protocols, allowing researchers to assess and compare 
various FL algorithms in consistent environments. This enables a comprehensive evaluation 

--- Page 9 ---
)
(
∑
∑
∑

--- Page 10 ---
)
(
∑
∑
∑
∑
∑
 ∑
∑
∑

--- Page 11 ---

--- Page 12 ---
of FL algorithms regarding accuracy, communication efficiency, and computational costs. 
Common framework promotes collaboration among researchers, practitioners, and orga­
nizations by aligning their efforts toward shared goals and challenges. In this section, we 
highlight the benchmark frameworks as shown in Table 4 which is used to conduct various 
experiments in FL.
2.5  Challenges in federated learning
To effectively safeguard user privacy, federated learning faces several challenges that need 
to be addressed, which are outlined below:
●
with the server rather than the raw data. It is important to make sure that no personal 
information is disclosed by the federated learning training model. There have been de­
velopments in data privacy techniques resulting in increased computation complexity 
and computational load on the federated network.
●
federated network is made up of millions of dispersed mobile devices and learning 
model may require a lot of communication during training data sharing among them. 
Techniques with high communication efficiency must be developed by considering the 
communication cost of FL, given the unreliability of network connection speed. If not 
adequately handled, the frequency of model updates might also overload the network.
●
devices may include Non-IID (non-independent and identically distributed) data. Be­
cause of variations in hardware, software, and network connectivity, every client in the 
network may have varying computation and communication capabilities. Some devices 
in a network are concurrently active, while others occasionally get the connectivity. 
Therefore, FL techniques must be resilient to offline devices in the network and able to 
withstand diverse hardware. Techniques for data formatting and storage can also differ 
throughout devices.

--- Page 13 ---
●
intentionally or unintentionally aggregate the global model, potentially resulting in er­
rors throughout the model’s training process. Low-quality model uploads can also result 
from unstable mobile network conditions. Appropriate authentication methods must be 
implemented at the data sources and aggregation servers due to security issues in FL 
related to data and model poisoning. Large-scale poisoning attacks could affect the ac­
curacy of the model. Due to the model’s centralization approach, distributed denial of 
service (DDoS) attacks can also affect the network and central server. Frequent updates 
to local models and the data they gather into the global model may overburden the net­
work and central server.
This section discusses the importance of privacy protection and critical technologies in FL, 
reviews literature on strategies to preserve privacy and advance research in the chosen area. 
It enables us to recognize the possible advantages and restrictions of every privacy protec­
tion system and how it might be used to handle data privacy issues in situations involving 
collaborative learning.
3.1  Need for privacy preservation in federated learning
Studies on federated learning have proposed different solutions to implement privacy-
enhancing schemes with the aim of addressing privacy in FL. The primary challenges that 
arise and require attention are as follows:
●
Research indicates that participant data may not be protected when transferring gra­
dients. Private training data can still be exposed through the shared gradient updates 
(Zerka et al. 2020).
●
dients during the training phase, which could undermine the model’s availability and 
integrity. To stop the model from converging or tamper with the global model, they can 
conduct targeted and untargeted poisoning attacks (Mothukuri et al. 2021b).
●
server for aggregation, the honest-but-curious servers might retain information about 
the training data provided by users through model update gradients (Le et al. 2023).
●
information from trained models by eavesdropping on the communication channel and 
compromising the FL system (Wang et al. 2023a).
3.2  Privacy enhancing technologies
In order to improve FL’s privacy preservation during the training process, numerous 
approaches have been suggested as shown in Fig. 5.

--- Page 14 ---
3.2.1  Anonymization
The dataset contains personal information about an individual, including medical diagno­
sis records, bank account details, etc., and with the release of such a dataset, the personal 
information can be compromised. One of the effective techniques for safeguarding data 
privacy is anonymization. It is the process of eliminating any personal information that 
could be used to identify a particular user. However, some case studies show these opera­
tions are insufficient to guarantee the privacy of private information, especially with respect 
to statistical queries. Choudhury et al. (2020), a syntactic strategy for anonymizing local 
data at each site, which is (k, k )-anonymity-based approach. It considers both relational 
and transactional attributes of local healthcare data D from N sites, where k represents the 
minimum number of records in a group that must be indistinguishable from one another and 
k refers to the minimum number of distinct values for a sensitive attribute within each 
group of k records. The function u () and u () measures information loss for relational and 
transactional attributes, with parameter δ balancing the goals, where u is the utility of the 
relational part and u is the utility of the transactional part.
3.2.2  Differential privacy
It is a technique developed to facilitate secure analysis over sensitive data to safeguard 
privacy. It guarantees that the addition or exclusion of a single record from a dataset has no 
effect on the outcome of an algorithm (Dwork 2008). By injecting noise or using a sample 
dataset, it maintains statistical features and safeguards the privacy of the data by preventing 
an attacker from getting the exact information even after several searches. It is usual practice 
to add noise into output during each iteration phase in order to maintain user privacy (Abadi 

--- Page 15 ---
et al. 2016). FL can withstand membership inference attacks and prevent leakage of weights 
during training by implementing DP mechanisms. DP is implemented by introducing noise 
to the data with two different approaches, namely: Sensitivity of a function explained in 
work (Dwork 2006) and based on an exponential distribution among discrete values given 
in work (McSherry and Talwar 2007). The sensitivity of a function M : D → R over an 
arbitrary domain for datasets, say, D and D differing by a record is the maximum change in 
the output of M over all possible inputs.
M = max ∥ M(D) − M(D ) ∥
The probability distribution induced by a quality function q : (D × R) → R for given dataset 
dϵD , assigns a score to each outcome rϵR by S(q) = max ∥ q(D, r) − q(D , r) ∥
. The mechanism M to choose an outcome rϵR given a dataset instance dϵD is defined as 
(
)
, where α serves as a normalization 
M(d, q) = return r with probability α · exp
factor.
By introducing partial noise, DP protects against computationally dominant adversar­
ies. The findings are greatly impacted by the phenomenon of introducing noise to a small 
dataset during model training. DP is, therefore, not appropriate for small datasets and is best 
suited for large datasets. Thus, DP algorithms introduce noise to the dataset and secure the 
data by preventing re-identification attacks. Two noise-adding differential privacy methods 
are Gaussian and Laplacian methods (Wu et al. 2022). Further, based on the application 
scenario, DP can be of two types, namely global differential privacy and local differential 
privacy. Both forms of DP can ensure ϵ−differential requirements of an individual user, 
regardless of minor differences in application scenarios. Clients employ a federated optimi­
zation technique with DP (Geyer et al. 2017) to safeguard their global differential privacy. 
The trained model contains a large number of parameters to ensure accurate communica­
tion and functionality. The increase in noise will greatly diminish its validity. A method 
based on adaptive gradient is suggested (Andrew et al. 2021) to reduce noise penetration to 
the gradient and avoid adding unnecessary extraneous noise. DP is used in FL healthcare 
applications as an essential privacy algorithm, mainly to train medical text data and develop 
models for medical image analysis (Adnan et al. 2022). Lu et al. (2022) suggested appropri­
ate deep learning models may be efficiently developed from distributed data warehouses 
via poorly supervised multi-pose learning with DP by using random noise, avoiding the 
complication of direct data sharing. Data privacy for diabetic patients is protected (Chang 
et al. 2021) by the development of an adaptive differential privacy algorithm and a gradient 
verification-based consensus technique to detect poisoning attacks. An incentive mecha­
nism using differential private federated learning (DPFL) framework (Wang et al. 2021a) 
developed to prevent data owners’ privacy leakage in the IoT domain. DP provides a notably 
higher level of protection with some degree of precision loss. The study (Gupta et al. 2022b) 
addresses the challenge of noise injection by dividing data into sensitive and non-sensitive 
parts, enhancing the efficiency of the classification model. It aims to ensure data security 
during storage, analysis, and sharing in the cloud while maintaining utility and minimizing 
computational overhead. To achieve this, the data is partitioned using k-anonymization, and 
privacy is preserved by selectively applying the Laplace mechanism to inject noise, thereby 
reducing the impact of perturbation. The processed data is then shared with the cloud, where 

--- Page 16 ---
a multi-layered feed-forward deep neural network (MFNN) is employed for analysis. The 
MFNN is trained using the TriPhase Adaptive Differential Evolution (TADE) algorithm, 
which optimizes the network’s learning process for improved performance.
3.2.3  Homomorphic encryption
It is a cryptographic method that enables computations to be carried out on encrypted 
data without decrypting it. HE is particularly useful in privacy-preserving data analytics, 
as it allows untrusted parties to work on encrypted values without accessing the under­
lying plaintext data (Li et al. 2020c). There are different types of homomorphic encryp­
tion schemes, such as partially homomorphic encryption (PHE), somewhat homomorphic 
encryption (SWHE) and fully homomorphic encryption(FHE). PHE helps to protect sensi­
tive data confidentiality by allowing only specific mathematical operations to be carried out 
on encrypted information. With this method, a ciphertext can undergo a single operation an 
infinite number of times (Wu et al. 2021b). SWHE schemes are limited to a finite number of 
operations (such as addition or multiplication) and a finite number of executions (Chen et al. 
2021). FHE scheme enables computations on both addition and multiplication operations 
and supports any number of operations (Gao et al. 2023a), and improving the efficiency of 
secure multi-party computation. It can handle arbitrary computations of ciphertexts. Addi­
tively homomorphic encryption (AHE) allows for the computation of encrypted messages, 
such as adding two encrypted messages or adding an encrypted message to a clear integer. 
One popular example of AHE is the Paillier cryptosystem that satisfies the basic homo­
morphic properties, such as the ability to perform addition and scalar multiplication on 
ciphertexts. It uses a modulus and a random generator to encrypt messages and perform 
computations on them (Madi et al. 2021). Additive homomorphism is employed to guaran­
tee model parameter sharing security, preventing the central server from leaking the client’s 
private information (Aono et al. 2017). While federated logical regression model (Hardy 
et al. 2017), employs an additive homomorphism method to effectively resist honest and 
curious attackers, the SecureBoost (Cheng et al. 2021) a decision tree model is constructed 
using HE to protect its parameters.
ElGamal encryption has multiplicative homomorphic property based on Diffie-Hellman 
key exchange, allowing for operations on ciphertexts without decrypting them (Li et al. 
2023b). Linearly homomorphic encryption (LHE) is a public-key encryption scheme that 
supports linearly homomorphic operations over ciphertexts (Liu et  al. 2021). It enables 
computations to be carried out directly on encrypted data without needing access to the 
secret key. The semantic security property of LHE ensures that an adversary cannot distin­
guish between ciphertexts and random values. FHE satisfies the requirement that operations 
on plaintext that involve addition or multiplication be equal to those that involve ciphertext. 
It enables computations on sensitive data while preserving privacy, as the data remains 
encrypted throughout the computation process. FHE schemes, such as the Cheon-Kim-Kim-
Song (CKKS) scheme, can handle operations on floating-point numbers and vectors (Miao 
et al. 2022).
Zhang et  al. (2019) safeguards gradients on an untrusted server by encrypting par­
ticipants’ local gradients using the Paillier homomorphic cryptosystem, thereby ensuring 
secure aggregation and protecting individual privacy. Zhang et al. (2023) proposed a FL 
scheme that consists of a Paillier homomorphic cryptosystem combined with an online or 

--- Page 17 ---
offline signature technique that enables the edge server to safely handle the offline portion 
of the lightweight gradients integrity verification for edge computing systems. To address 
attacks aiming at security vulnerabilities, Jia et al. (2021) proposed a data protection aggre­
gation scheme based on distributed random forest with DP and the distributed AdaBoost 
with HE methods, which enable multiple data protection in data sharing and model sharing 
and integrated the methods with Blockchain and FL. To accomplish ciphertext-level model 
aggregation and model filtering, Wang et al. (2022a) proposed FL for internet of vehicles 
(IoV) which can enable the verifiability of the local models while maintaining privacy using 
multi-krum technology fused with AHE. Authors (Miao et al. 2022) proposed a Blockchain-
infused FL to reduce the poisoning attacks from malicious clients and servers. They use 
cosine similarity to detect malicious gradients uploaded by malicious clients and employ 
CKKS and FHE to guarantee the privacy and integrity of the federated learning process 
through secure aggregation. In order to prevent attacks, Sun et al. (2022) proposed a Block­
chain FL audit strategy for encrypted gradients. The strategy records the encrypted gradients 
from data owners using a behavior chain, and it assesses the quality of the gradients using 
an audit chain. The scheme uses a homomorphic noise mechanism that guarantees the avail­
ability of aggregated gradient.
3.2.4  Secure multiparty computation
It is a method for processing sensitive data while maintaining privacy. It permits several par­
ticipants to collaboratively calculate a function on their confidential inputs without disclosing 
any details about their inputs to one another. SMPC can be used to accomplish secure aggre­
gation of local model updates while maintaining privacy in FL. One of the most important 
methods in information security is cryptography, which is essential to safeguarding data in 
all its forms. It accomplishes this by providing technological and theoretical support for data 
integrity, privacy, and authentication. Segmentation between encrypted data sharing is made 
possible by secure multiparty computing, preventing any client from retrieving the complete 
dataset by themselves. The evolution of SMPC yields three modules: oblivious transfer, 
secret sharing, and garbled circuits. Semi-honest adversary, malicious adversary, and covert 
adversary models are three main categories of SMPC security models. SMPC plays a crucial 
role in safeguarding privacy in FL for medical applications (Li et al. 2023a). Pairwise mask­
ing and secret sharing are the main techniques used by SMPC. The clients agree on pairwise 
masks using the Diffie-Hellman key exchange in pairwise masking. However, the aggrega­
tion result may not provide sufficient privacy for individual users. AHE techniques can be 
used to protect each uploaded local value after masking, but it incurs extra overhead. While 
the secret-sharing technique involves dividing the secret into several parts and distributing 
it to several parties, and the technique expects participants to combine their shares in order 
to put the secret back together. Using technique of secret sharing, several privacy-preserving 
aggregation techniques in FL do not require any additional steps before delivering masked 
data. Chain-PPFL (Li et al. 2020c) maintains privacy based on the chained secure multiparty 
computing approach, which employs two techniques: the single-masking mechanism and 
the chained communication mechanism. These enable clients to transmit masked informa­
tion through a sequential chain framework. Group signature for federated learning (GSFL) 
scheme (Kanchan et al. 2023) is a privacy-preserving protocol that lowers compute and 
transmission costs dramatically while safeguarding client identity and data privacy from 

--- Page 18 ---
privacy-related threats using HE and a group of clients can be validated using the group 
signature creation based on zero-knowledge proof of knowledge (ZKPoK).
AnoFel Almashaqbeh and Ghodsi (2023) allows users to remain anonymous while engag­
ing in a dynamic environment that will enable users to join and exit at any time. SVeriFL 
(Gao et al. 2023a) uses Boneh–Lynn–Shacham (BLS) signature and multiparty security to 
verify parameter integrity, server aggregation results, and participant data privacy. HyFL 
hybrid framework (Marx et al. 2023) that uses SMPC techniques and hierarchical feder­
ated learning to ensure data and global model privacy, facilitating large-scale deployments 
and reducing workload on resource-constraint devices. MLGuard (Khazbak et al. 2020), a 
distributed earning system that protects privacy and mitigates poisoning attacks using an 
additive secret sharing scheme, multiplication triplets, and cosine similarity score. BFLC 
(Li et al. 2020b), a Blockchain-enabled FL with a committee consensus mechanism, ensures 
global model stability, addresses storage capacity and consensus efficiency challenges, and 
uses k-fold cross-validation and anti-malicious smart contracts to elect superior nodes for 
training rounds. Biscotti (Shayan et  al. 2021), a Peer-to-Peer (P2P) approach that uses 
Blockchain and cryptographic primitives to coordinate ML processes between peering cli­
ents. It uses the multi-krum defense to stop peers from poisoning the model, differentially 
private noise to offer privacy, and Shamir secrets to securely aggregate SGD updates. Using 
zero-knowledge non-interactive arguments of knowledge (ZK-NIARK) and lightweight 
primitives like pseudorandom generators, (Wang et al. 2023b) suggests a PTDFL solution 
to handle data owners’ access and privacy problems in decentralized FL.
The literature on privacy-preserving mechanisms in FL falls into two main categories based 
on their architecture, namely, centralized FL and decentralized FL. Figure 6 depicts the lit­
erature map of the FL architecture-based studies covered in this section. This map includes 

--- Page 19 ---
circles representing articles of different numbers of citations, which are grouped based on 
two colors to differentiate between centralized and decentralized FL. The primary privacy 
mechanism used in FL is a combination of privacy-preserving technologies like DP and 
SMPC with HE, secret sharing, or pairwise masking techniques.
4.1  Privacy preserving centralized federated learning
This section discusses the literature review on privacy mechanisms in a centralized FL envi­
ronment where aggregation of gradients is done by a dedicated central server. In the subse­
quent literature (Liu et al. 2021; Kanchan et al. 2023; Wang et al. 2023a; Gao et al. 2023a), 
the privacy-preserving FL framework uses HE as the core privacy-enhancing technology. 
Liu et  al. (2021) uses LHE that performs computations on encrypted gradients without 
accessing the actual user data to safeguard user privacy. It computes the Pearson correlation 
coefficient using coordinate-wise medians to identify malicious gradients and subsequently 
detect poisoning attacks. Kanchan et al. (2023) incorporates HE and enables the aggregation 
of encrypted data on the server. It includes a masking technique to mask individual client 
data, and a group signature is used to validate a group of clients. This scheme simultane­
ously ensures non-repudiation, privacy, and authentication. Paillier HE is used to encrypt 
user training models on the client side, prevents internal attacks through access control, and 
deploys an acknowledgment mechanism at the server to temporarily remove unresponsive 
users to reduce waiting delays and communication overhead (Wang et al. 2023a). Gao et al. 
(2023a) focuses on confirming the accuracy of the aggregated result using multi-party secu­
rity with BLS signature, as well as the integrity of the uploaded parameters to the server, 
utilizing CKKS approximation homomorphic encryption for data privacy.
By retaining a clean, limited training dataset, the service provider builds confidence (Cao 
et al. 2020), a byzantine resilient federated learning technique. A server model is used to 
validate local model changes, effectively limiting the impact of malicious local models. 
It proposed a new aggregation rule based on ReLU-clipped cosine similarity-based trust 
score that considers the direction and amount of local model updates in addition to server 
model update. Multi-hop communication with BLS signature is used to hide clients’ iden­
tities (Karakoc et al. 2023). It prevents malicious activities by forwardee clients altering 
model updates and proposed approaches for robustness against packet drop behaviors. This 
allows the server to perform certain analyses without violating privacy and prevents leak­
age of model updates. FL frameworks that focus on privacy-preserving and also reduce 
the communication load that is incurred due to repeated exchange of model updates by 
use of quantization technique are explored in literature (Nguyen et al. 2022; Nagy et al. 
2023; Lang et al. 2023a, b). Nguyen et al. (2022) seeks to maximize the convergence rate 
and meet differential privacy needs by optimizing quantization with binomial mechanism 
parameters and communication resources. Bitwise quantization is applied to local model 
updates, followed by the update vector’s application of the randomized response method of 
local differential privacy (LDP) and the encoding of client-side text input using the rolling 
feature hashing technique (Nagy et al. 2023). In Lang et al. (2023a), a random codebook is 
used to encode data with the help of a nested lattice quantizer and generate a set of model 
updates with a few bits that are applied with the randomized response mechanism of LDP. 
The bits received in this system are converted into an empirical histogram throughout the 
decoding process. Random lattice vector quantization (Lang et al. 2023b) is used, which is a 

--- Page 20 ---
compression technique that helps to enhance privacy by incorporating multivariate privacy 
preserving noise at a desired bit-rate without significantly affecting the model’s utility.
FL framework that implements SMPC techniques ensures data and global model privacy. 
Serial chain framework is employed to enable the transfer of masked data among partici­
pants using the chained SMPC method (Li et al. 2020c). The hybrid framework approach 
(Marx et  al. 2023) ensures data and global model privacy through hierarchical FL and 
SMPC techniques, thereby decreasing the workload on resource-constrained devices and 
enabling large-scale deployments. This scheme prevents malicious clients from executing 
model poisoning attack. There are privacy-preserving frameworks in FL (Zhao et al. 2021a; 
Wu et al. 2022; Le et al. 2023; Almashaqbeh and Ghodsi 2023) that use DP to protect cli­
ent’s privacy. They eliminate malicious clients that affect the prediction of global model 
accuracy. Zhao et al. (2021a) reduces privacy leakage by sharing only a few parameters and 
utilizes a proxy server to ensure client anonymity. It applies DP with a Gaussian mechanism 
to guarantee strong privacy protection. Wu et al. (2022) aims to limit the communication 
cost and provide stronger privacy preservation by combining an adaptive gradient descent 
technique like adam and adabound algorithm and uses DP with Gaussian mechanism. Adap­
tive differential privacy (Le et al. 2023) is used for local model updates and DP-tolerant 
anomaly detection (DPAD) technique confirms abnormalities. Almashaqbeh and Ghodsi 
(2023) maintains user anonymity while allowing users to join and exit, using non-interac­
tive proofs and cryptographic promises. Tables 5 and 6 summarizes the existing literature of 
centralized federated learning with privacy technique implemented along with model and 
dataset details used in the experimentation.
4.2  Privacy preserving decentralized federated learning
Decentralized federated learning (DFL) emerged as a new method in response to the two 
main problems with centralized FL, namely single point of failure (SPoF) and denial of 
service (DoS) attack. An alternate to the conventional client–server architecture is provided 
by P2P computing (Barkai 2000). While P2P distributed systems promote decentralization 
by allowing network nodes to act as both servers and clients, client–server architectures 
involve requests being made by clients and central servers processing and responding to the 
requests. Here, nodes form a network by randomly joining each node into a chain. All nodes 
are equal; there is no node more or less significant than each other. Peers should also act as 
both clients and servers by providing services. Peers have to be self-sufficient and decide for 
themselves how much they want to participate in the network.
With the help of a private interplanetary file system (IPFS), Pappas et al. (2021) offers 
a fully decentralized system that enables any client to initiate or participate in an ongoing 
training process. This framework requires less resources, grows with the number of par­
ticipants, and is resilient to sporadic connectivity. It also manages participant arrivals and 
departures dynamically. The decentralized architecture (Zhao et al. 2022) guarantees safe 
deep learning model training with a cipher-based matrix multiplication algorithm that is 
efficient and verifiable. The foundation of the trusted DFL algorithm (Gholami et al. 2022) 
is the concept of trust between network entities collaborating to accomplish specific goals. 
Information from previous collaborations is used to establish and preserve this trust. Trust 
estimations play a critical role in decisions about resource allocation, agent involvement, 
and access control. A consensus problem involves considering both local and global trust 

--- Page 21 ---

--- Page 22 ---

--- Page 23 ---
assessments. Local agents maintain a posterior probability distribution over the parameters 
of a global model (Wang et al. 2022b). The empirical assessments show that it is a useful tool 
for managing non-IID data, especially when task complexity rises. Li et al. (2022) devel­
oped a technique that groups clients into comparable groups without requiring advanced 
knowledge of the count of clusters required. It aims to provide improved personalisation 
by offering a single global model for each cluster. It is a two-stage method that uses client 
similarities to realize an adaptable topology and apply approaches like neighbor selection 
and neighbor augmentation methods that reduce noisy neighbor estimations.
Li et al. (2021a) tackled the DFL issue in IoT systems, which uses mutual knowledge 
sharing across nearby clients to lessen performance deterioration brought on by client 
drift when data heterogeneity is present. This study outperforms baseline approaches like 
FedAvg and FullAvg. GossipFL (Tang et al. 2022) focuses on efficient network resource 
utilization in practical DFL configurations, incorporating a sparsification technique and a 
gossip matrix-generating algorithm. During each communication round, the client can share 
a highly compressed model with one peer and improve bandwidth resource utilization. Par­
ticipants manage two separate models: a proxy model that is publicly shared and a private 
model (Kalra et al. 2023). The proxy model preserves the privacy of each individual par­
ticipant while facilitating effective information sharing between them without the use of a 
centralized server. Improved privacy protection and less communication overhead are two 
of the main benefits of the study. Gao et al. (2023b) utilizes LDP to balance model accuracy 
and data privacy, which demonstrates effectiveness in avoiding low-quality updates and 
supports dynamic group settings. Wang et al. (2023b) addresses data owners’ access and 
privacy risks by using zero-knowledge non-interactive arguments of knowledge and light­
weight primitives like pseudorandom generators and Lagrange interpolation.
Federated learning, built on Blockchain technology, is one method for attaining FL 
decentralization by utilizing Blockchain functionalities. The decentralization and reliabil­
ity of Blockchain technology have drawn a lot of interest in its application. It uses smart 
contracts for secure model aggregation, guaranteeing safe and authentic model updates. 
Blockchain-enabled decentralized FL can offer incentives to clients, encourage the integra­
tion of more clients, and reduce the computation and communication burdens on nodes. 
This section of the literature review focuses on such decentralized FL schemes. BlockFL 
(Kim et  al. 2019), is a Blockchain-based, tamper-proof, secure distributed ledger-based 

--- Page 24 ---
FL system that validates local training results and expands its federation to include unreli­
able devices on a public network. Although the scheme encourages the inclusion of more 
devices with additional training samples, it needs to account for the extra delay introduced 
by the Blockchain network. Blockchain-driven, aggregator-free, decentralized FL system 
(Ramanan and Nakayama 2020) that uses smart contracts to manage model aggregation and 
update processes in FL. Decentralized multi-community training framework (Zhou et al. 
2020) enables byzantine resilience for distributed learning using a sharding mechanism. 
Further, scheme introduced by Li et al. (2020b) to validate and aggregate local updates, 
ensures the stability of the global model using k-fold cross-validation, where committee 
nodes validate the local updates. By utilizing the homomorphic hashing technique for vali­
dation and introducing verifiers to handle the verification workflow of miners in parallel (Li 
et al. 2021b), improves the efficacy of model verification. Through the use of Blockchain 
technology, participating clients can confirm the global model integrity and a transparent 
ledger can be used to record model updates. Privacy-enhancing techniques like differential 
privacy can be implemented via Blockchain to enhance privacy in FL. Ma et al. (2022), a 
distributed learning paradigm that combines Blockchain technology with federated learning 
to address privacy issues. It uses LDP with Gaussian noise to enhance privacy. Mahmood 
and Jusas (2022) improves data privacy and security, preventing data and model poisoning 
attacks and promoting good behavior among decentralized nodes in FL with Blockchain 
using DP with Laplace mechanism and public key infrastructure (PKI). Along with DP, 
multi-krum defense is used by Shayan et al. (2021) and Zhao et al. (2021b) to validate the 
updates through miners and thus overcome poisoning attacks. Zhao et al. (2021b) also uses 
Shamir secrets for secure aggregation, while Singh et al. (2022b) implements SMPC by 
combining techniques like homomorphic encryption and differential privacy. Wang et al. 
(2022a) uses additive HE with multi-Krum technology to achieve cipher model aggregation 
and filtering, allowing both privacy preservation and the verifiability of local models. It also 
takes into account malicious client and server scenarios.
Many FL schemes incorporate a secure multiparty mechanism and focus on distributed 
storage requirements. Miao et al. (2022) utilizes a Blockchain system to ensure transpar­
ency in processes and enhance privacy by employing cosine similarity and CKKS fully 
homomorphic encryption. Li et al. (2023b) utilizes ElGamal encryption and smart contracts 
for secure self-aggregation and it investigates privacy leakage. It presents a gradient inver­
sion attack in order to obtain the original data from sign-based quantized gradients. Chen 
et al. (2023) uses advanced encryption standard with EAX mode of operation (AES-EAX) 
to protect information sharing among nodes and Abou El Houda et al. (2023), a global 
cyber-security framework that integrates Blockchain, FL, SMPC, and software-defined net­
working (SDN) technologies to manage distributed denial of service attack collaboration, 
ensuring efficiency, reliability, and privacy. Singh et al. (2023) uses distributed hash table 
(DHT) at the cloud layer facilitates decentralized storage, while Blockchain handles data 
authentication and validation. Decentralized P2P (Sezer et al. 2023) concept with event 
and storage-based smart contracts having cryptographic primitives like digital signatures is 
used with IPFS for authentication. Baucas et al. (2023) proposed an IoT platform using fog 
technology, combining private Blockchain and FL, to address network flexibility and data 
privacy issues in wearable IoT devices for predictive healthcare. Blockchain-enabled DFL 
schemes with privacy-preserving techniques and consensus algorithms are summarized in 
Table 7 and 8.

--- Page 25 ---

--- Page 26 ---
Despite blockchain’s inherent transparency and immutability, establishing trust across 
different blockchain-FL systems is complex due to various interoperability and governance 
issues. Blockchain-enabled federated learning introduces challenges from the perspectives 
of trust and privacy like cross-chain communication and the establishment of mutual trust 
among platforms can be complicated as different blockchain platforms utilize distinct con­
sensus mechanisms. This interoperability issue makes it difficult for various blockchain 
networks to efficiently exchange data or collaborate on federated learning tasks (Ou et al. 
2022). Literature (Cheng et al. 2024) contributes to the creation of a decentralized proto­
col that manages cross-chain interactions autonomously, eliminating the need for trust in 
external parties. This approach reduces the risk of centralization, strengthens security and 
provides an efficient solution for cross-chain interaction. Managing decentralized trust is 
difficult because of conflicting incentives between stakeholders and the risk of sybil attacks, 
where malicious nodes generate fake identities to exploit the system. These challenges can 
weaken trust in the blockchain network, disrupt the fair allocation of trust, and compromise 
the integrity of federated learning operations. Ensuring equal distribution of trust among all 
participating nodes remains a challenge, especially in diverse environments. Reputation-
based mechanisms can help by implementing trust scores and evaluating the reliability of 
FL participants (Raza et al. 2024). Authors (Yakubu et al. 2024) offers an analysis of the 
advantages and drawbacks of various consensus mechanisms, along with the security weak­
nesses they may exhibit.
Privacy-preserved FL is a transformative approach to ML, enhancing privacy and address­
ing regulatory and ethical concerns by enabling collaborative training across several data 
sources without requiring direct data exchange. This section explores the diverse applica­
tions of privacy-preserved federated learning, used in various fields to balance robust data 
insights with stringent privacy requirements, and demonstrates its successful implementa­
tion of privacy-enhancing techniques. Figure 7 depicts the literature map of various FL 
applications covered in this section. This map includes circles representing articles of dif­
ferent numbers of citations and is grouped based on three colors to differentiate between 
applications like healthcare, IoT, and NLP.

--- Page 27 ---

--- Page 28 ---
5.1  FL applications in natural language processing
FL has applications in the domain of NLP that improve text prediction, enhance voice 
assistants, and develop personalized translation models. Hard et al. (2018) highlights the 
advantages of training recurrent neural network language models directly on client devices, 
enabling next-word prediction in a smartphone virtual keyboard without transferring sensi­
tive data. Here, FL environment simplifies the process of implementing privacy by default, 
granting customers control over how their data is used. Google’s GBoard is a popular 
application that utilizes FL to enhance query suggestions in the Android phone keyboard 
(Yang et al. 2018). Emoji can be predicted from text entered on a mobile keyboard using a 
word-level recurrent neural network, which has been demonstrated by Ramaswamy et al. 
(2019). The work shows that it is possible to train production-quality models for applica­
tions involving natural language interpretation using federated learning while maintaining 
user data on their devices. The system (Zhu et al. 2019) for processing financial documents 
must have unsegmented text recognition, where the financial documents contain impor­
tant personal data, such as invoices, transcripts, identity certificates, etc. These data are 
frequently held on secure servers owned by various organizations, and they must not be 

--- Page 29 ---
moved past the firewall of the respective institution. Here FL offers a data-secure method for 
combining disparate datasets for model training. The FL framework (Liu et al. 2020) aims 
to generate various image representations from distinct tasks, which are then integrated to 
form highly detailed picture representations for vision-and-language grounding tasks, such 
as image captioning and visual question answering (VQA). To learn such visual representa­
tions, the study proposed the Aligning, Integrating and Mapping Network (aimNet). For FL 
models, a variable ensemble distillation aggregation technique (Lin et al. 2020) allows for 
cost savings, improved privacy, and resilient integration across a range of heterogeneous 
client models. However, the only way to directly average model parameters is if all of the 
models have the same size and structure, which could be a limitation in a lot of situations. 
NLP models are trained in a distributed computing environment using FedNLP (Lin et al. 
2021), which efficiently performs NLP tasks like text summarization and sequence tag­
ging. AdaFL (Cai et al. 2023), is an add-on to the FedNLP framework by improving the 
adapter configuration over the training session where shallow knowledge is learned rapidly 
by training fewer and smaller adapters at the top layers of the model and by assigning 
participant devices to trial groups, AdaFL continuously tracks possible adaptor combina­
tions. It demonstrates up to 155.5 times faster model convergence time than vanilla FedNLP. 
Hilmkil et al. (2021) looked into FL parameters for transformer language model tuning. 
Additionally, three BERT transformer variations- BERT, ALBERT, and DistilBERT-were 
assessed for several NLP tasks like text categorization and sentiment analysis. Basu et al. 
(2021a) offers a text classification model built upon contextualized transformers (BERT and 
Roberta) linked with privacy features like federated learning and differential privacy. They 
describe how to analyze desired privacy-utility tradeoffs and how to privately train NLP 
models using the Financial Phrase Bank dataset. FL framework named SEFL (Deng et al. 
2022), significantly improves performance by eliminating the need for trusted entities like 
aggregators or cryptographic primitives. FedBERT (Tian et al. 2022), is a pre-training tool 
for BERT that uses split learning with FL to pre-train an extended model with the ability to 
function exceptionally well while limiting the disclosure of raw data. The recommendation 
system with federated learning (Mansour et al. 2020) is promoted with the development of 
a language model that can promptly deliver the next suggestion when users make a request. 
Businesses are using chatbots to promote their services, but there are privacy challenges like 
access control and data leakage, which need to be addressed. Jalali and Hongsong (2024) 
suggests a framework combining FL with Blockchain and FHE with face recognition and 
increases chatbot accuracy by 90%. ChatGPT has generated interest in the revolutionary 
potential of chatbots to automate language tasks worldwide. Su et al. (2024) leverages the 
strengths of DFL and SMPC to create chatbot systems that are both privacy-preserving and 
secure. Here, the encrypted global model is stored via IPFS, and clients need to decrypt 
using their private keys.
5.2  FL applications in healthcare
Advancements in artificial intelligence has resulted in the creation of numerous applications 
that identify and predict diseases, handle medical diagnostic evidence, and also in pharma­
ceutical sectors. However, gathering medical data from several hospitals is challenging due 
to patient privacy protections. Therefore, FL is essential to the healthcare industry because 
it permits the creation of diagnostic tools and predictive models while protecting patient 

--- Page 30 ---
privacy and regulatory compliance. Without a central patient database, FL enables coopera­
tive model training across several healthcare facilities. With the development of FL-based 
healthcare applications, standards and privacy regulations for electronic medical informa­
tion for patients are required. The various ethical and legal issues currently arising in the 
right to patient privacy and ways to improve patient data utilization without compromising 
privacy are analyzed in Price and Cohen (2019). Federated learning can improve security 
and efficiency when paired with edge computing, Blockchain, and privacy-preserving algo­
rithms. Application of FL in healthcare is broadly classified into 3 categories, namely:
●
conditions like diabetes, cancer, and heart problems by combining data from many 
sources without exchanging patient records. Furthermore, various globally accessible 
public medical databases like the Molecular Taxonomy of Breast Cancer International 
Consortium (METABRIC), The Cancer Genome Atlas (TCGA), and the National Can­
cer Database (NCDB), have facilitated the development of training algorithms such 
as transfer learning, leading to substantial advancements in medical research (Li et al. 
2023a). FedHealth (Chen et al. 2020), a federated transfer learning platform for wearable 
healthcare, allows precise, individualized healthcare without compromising privacy and 
security for Parkinson’s disease diagnosis. Encrypting patient data in memory and disk, 
a federated cloud architecture-based rheumatic heart disease classifier (Blanquer et al. 
2020) improves privacy without relocating patient data. Basu et al. (2021b) explores the 
use of NLP techniques in diagnosing medical conditions like depression, focusing on 
the use of differential privacy in FL setup. The research provides insights into private 
training of NLP models and offers an open-source implementation for future healthcare 
and mental health studies. Elayan et al. (2021) proposed methods to improve healthcare 
sustainability IoT-driven platforms for data analysis, preserving privacy and supporting 
decentralized data structure, and experimenting with FL algorithms for skin disease 
detection. Auto-FedAvg (Xia et al. 2021), is a data-driven technique that automatically 
adjusts aggregation weights based on data distributions and models’ training progress. 
The technique outperforms FL algorithms on a CIFAR-10 dataset and shows efficiency 
in medical image analysis tasks. Collaborative learning of data from different sources 
using clustered federated learning for COVID-19 diagnosis is explored (Qayyum et al. 
2022), the study promises better results comparing with specialized FL baseline and 
multi-modal conventional FL. Hybrid framework developed by Yaqoob et al. (2023) for 
heart disease classification, utilizing support vector machines and modified artificial bee 
colony optimization, with federated matched averaging for privacy. It addressed train­
ing latency, communication cost, and SPoF. FeSEC (Asad and Yuan 2024), is a secure 
and efficient FL framework developed to improve accuracy and privacy preservation in 
COVID-19 detection, utilizing sparse compression and homomorphic encryption for 
efficient communication among remote hospitals.
●
compromising patient privacy. The creation of image-based diagnostic tools for MRI, 
CT, and X-ray imaging modalities is made possible by FL methods. In order to help 
clinicians diagnose patients, Lee et al. (2019) employed a multi-federated learning net­
work built on the APOLLO framework to convert real-world data into medical diagnos­
tic evidence. The framework (Silva et al. 2019) offers an application for multi-centric 

--- Page 31 ---
brain imaging data analysis and uses FL to examine the connections between brain 
anatomy and disease using big datasets gathered from various clinics. The open-source 
federated learning front-end framework (Silva et al. 2020) addresses data access and 
transfer challenges in healthcare. It accommodates various models and optimization 
methods and demonstrates the workflow for deploying learning models. The lack of 
labeled training sets remains an issue when dealing with medical picture segmentation; 
FKD-Med (Sun et al. 2024), is developed for privacy-sensitive data aggregation across 
many healthcare institutions with knowledge distillation (KD) to improve communica­
tion efficiency. The study was tested on two medical picture segmentation datasets, and 
it improved data privacy, reduced communication costs, and increased accuracy.
●
facilitates and dispersed data sources to support drug research and development while 
maintaining data privacy. Prediction on the hospitalization rate of heart disease patients 
is studied (Brisimi et al. 2018), and a community-based FL model is developed to pre­
dict mortality and ICU stay time (Huang et al. 2019). In order to secure patient data, 
Goecks et al. (2020) suggested employing FL in biomedicine to train a model using data 
from several healthcare systems. FL addresses various statistical and system challenges 
in biomedical science (Xu et al. 2021) by providing access to diverse clinical, pharma­
ceutical, and hospital data while ensuring data privacy.
5.3  FL applications in IoT and edge computing
FL is suitable for preserving privacy on IoT devices since it allows strong privacy controls, 
access control, and robust classifiers without compromising sensitive information. FL safe­
guards user privacy and ensures data security throughout the device phase by exchanging 
protected limits. It is advised to employ FL in various IoT and edge networks as a reli­
able, intelligent, and efficient alternative to traditional centralized methods (Kholod et al. 
2020). The study discusses machine learning’s role in safeguarding IoT networks; the paper 
addresses potential risks and threats related to IoT systems. It highlights the application of 
FL for IoT security, addressing security threats and performance issues. Various ML models 
like neural networks, support vector machines (SVM), and CNNs have been employed, 
along with technologies like elliptic-curve cryptography and Blockchain, to enhance pri­
vacy and security in FL. It enables training ML-based intrusion detection systems (IDS) on 
distributed IoT devices, improving security against various attack types. FL utilizes cryp­
tographic approaches like homomorphic encryption and secure function evaluation to pre­
serve privacy while exchanging model updates securely. Differential Privacy techniques are 
employed in FL to ensure privacy-preserving learning. Federated learning models in IoT 
networks are designed to capture compressed representations of anomalous observations, 
enhancing privacy protection. FL addresses privacy concerns by securely updating local 
and global models to prevent exposure of sensitive user data (Ghimire and Rawat 2022).
To address data and content level privacy issues, Yin et al. (2021) suggests a hybrid 
privacy-preserving FL method that blends function encryption techniques with Bayesian 
differential privacy techniques. The sparse differential gradient (SDG) is used to address 
efficiency concerns. The Local Bayesian Differential Privacy technique adjusts privacy 
budget allocation, noise addition, and service quality. During data aggregation, harmful 
attempts are prevented by enhanced function encryption. Lu et al. (2020a) combines fed­

--- Page 32 ---
erated learning with permissioned Blockchain to offer a privacy-preserving data-sharing 
mechanism for multiple distributed parties in IIoT applications. By using multiparty data 
retrieval, these permissioned Blockchains takes the place of a trusted curator to connect each 
participant. The plan increases computing resource efficiency and usage while strengthening 
security without relying on a single source of trust. VFL is a verifiable FL framework for 
big data in industrial IoT, which uses Lagrange interpolation to confirm the aggregated gra­
dients are accurate (Fu et al. 2022). The VFL ensures the security of the model and private 
gradient, maintaining constant verification overhead regardless of participant count. The 
approach prevents malicious aggregation servers from returning forged gradients. The rapid 
advancement of IoT and smart services has led to the development of various cyber-physical 
systems (CPS), including intelligent connected cars, smart farming, and smart logistics. 
Zhang et al. (2020) enables smart services that use trusted federated learning frameworks 
for training machine learning models and ensure the services are trustworthy to monitor 
the CPS behaviors. PerFit is a cutting-edge cloud-based system that combines data pri­
vacy protection and federated learning for intelligent IoT applications (Wu et al. 2020). It 
allows for reduced latency and faster processing capacity by addressing heterogeneity in 
models, data statistics, and devices in IoT applications. Imteaj and Amini (2019) proposed 
a framework to create sensors for a range of decision-making applications such as tem­
perature, ambient light, and gyroscope sensors etc. Using distributed sensing to create a 
system where dispersed devices autonomously activate and collect all available sensor data. 
It lowers the cost of adding new sensors for independent Internet of Things applications and 
permits remote data collection. To solve the distributed optimization problem with privacy 
concerns, the differential privacy and multiparty computation are used. Kwon et al. (2020) 
presents a multiagent deep reinforcement learning algorithm for FL in the ocean environ­
ment using Internet-of-Underwater-Things (IoUT) devices. The FL-based distributed deep 
learning system aggregates local model parameters from each IoT device to create a global 
learning model, ensuring reliable delivery of parameters to a centralized FL machine. The 
algorithm aims to enhance deep learning throughput performance by computing efficient 
solutions using a MADDOG-based algorithm with fewer iterations. Du et al. (2020) can 
improve learning efficiency and privacy by efficiently utilizing network resources of FL in 
vehicular IoT systems. It can handle unbalanced data distribution and non-IID data, enhanc­
ing performance. Here FL addresses challenges like mobility, communication bandwidth, 
and quality of service (QoS) constraints, leading to more intelligent and efficient systems. 
Zhou et al. (2018) proposed a differential FL-based framework for real-time data processing 
in multi-robot environments. The proposed framework collects essential data while ensur­
ing data privacy and enabling real-time processing. FL faces challenges with centralized 
optimization, relying on a central server, which can lead to network scalability issues and 
SPoF. Savazzi et al. (2020) developed a fully distributed FL algorithm that generates data 
functionality inside the network, overcoming SPoF. Samarakoon et al. (2019) addresses 
the issue of joint power and resource allocation (JPRA) for low-latency communication by 
using an FL-based system that combines transmit power and resource allocation in vehicu­
lar networks. Gupta et al. (2022a) designed an approach to improve the security and pri­
vacy of IoT-generated data stored in cloud environments by integrating K-anonymization, 
ciphertext-policy attribute-based encryption (CP-ABE), and a voting classifier. The model 
ensures data protection, optimizes privacy preservation, and improves processing efficiency.

--- Page 33 ---
Edge computing involves processing data locally on edge devices or servers close to the 
data source, which helps to minimize latency and decrease bandwidth usage (Singh et al. 
2022a). FL enhances edge computing by allowing collaborative model training on these 
devices while preserving data privacy. Some applications of FL within edge computing 
include:
●
produce vast amounts of user data. These data can be exploited by malicious attackers 
to steal and manipulate information. To tackle this problem, Mothukuri et al. (2021a) 
proposed a FL-based anomaly detection approach, which enhances the accuracy of the 
global machine learning model by utilizing federated training cycles on gated recurrent 
units (GRUs) models and incorporating updates from multiple sources. According to 
experimental results, it performs better at protecting user data privacy and detecting at­
tacks than typical machine learning versions. Through cooperatively analyzing stream­
ing data, FL enables edge devices, like industrial sensors, IoT devices, and surveillance 
cameras, to discover anomalies and security concerns in real-time. Federated Learning 
reduces communication latency and improves anomaly detection accuracy. Huong et al. 
(2021) explores integrating edge computing with smart manufacturing systems to en­
hance real-time data processing and reduce anomaly detection delay, utilizing Federated 
Learning for improved cyber threat response. Poorazad et al. (2024) enhances anomaly 
detection through synchronous and buffered learning, preserving data privacy through 
HE and addressing communication bottlenecks for efficient model training across di­
verse clients.
●
watches, smartphones, and IoT devices can provide consumers with customized recom­
mendations based on their preferences and behavior patterns. Smartwatches and fitness 
trackers have become increasingly popular these days as they can detect brain activity, 
monitor health factors, and evaluate hydration levels (Iqbal et al. 2021). AI-enabled 
smart home devices may learn from human behavior and automate many household 
functions (Gill et al. 2022). On edge devices, collaborative model training guarantees 
data sovereignty and user privacy. In study (Neumann et al. 2023), lossy quantization 
is involved, which not only compresses the data but also acts as a form of parameter 
obfuscation, which provides a defense against certain attacks that recreate input data 
using model parameters.
●
tonomous vehicles to learn and adapt to a variety of road surroundings, traffic patterns, 
and driving circumstances. FL protects passenger privacy while improving autonomous 
driving systems’ safety and functionality. Samarakoon et al. (2019) explores the prob­
lem of JPRA for ultra-reliable low-latency communication in vehicular networks, em­
phasizing the reduction power consumption of the network while ensuring high reliabil­
ity with respect to probabilistic queuing delays. The safety and privacy of passengers 
are seriously threatened by data leaks in vehicular cyber-physical systems (VCPS), par­
ticularly when there are several users and transmission channels. To improve data pri­
vacy, Lu et al. (2020b) suggests a safe architecture, a federated learning mechanism that 
protects privacy, and a two-phase mitigation strategy that consists of cooperative data 
leakage detection and intelligent data transformation. A federated learning framework 

--- Page 34 ---
(Pokhrel and Choi 2020b) that prioritizes privacy and communication efficiency and 
improves the performance of the Internet of Vehicles (IoV) by training on-vehicle learn­
ing models through the local exchange of inputs, outputs, and learning parameters. Due 
to the intermittent and unreliable communications in IoV, the reliability and efficiency 
of data sharing need to be enhanced and hence, a federated learning architecture com­
bining locally directed acyclic graph (DAG) and permissioned Blockchain is proposed 
by Lu et al. (2020c) to improve security and dependability of model parameters, while 
incorporating deep reinforcement learning for node selection. Autonomous Blockchain-
based federated learning architecture (Pokhrel and Choi 2020a) for privacy-aware ve­
hicular communication networking is proposed, which uses local on-vehicle ML model 
updates, leveraging the Blockchain’s consensus mechanism. The framework includes 
adjustable network and BFL parameters, quantifying their influence on system perfor­
mance and determining optimal block arrival rates. Unmanned aerial vehicles (UAV) 
are increasingly used in wireless networks for communication, military, medical supply 
delivery, and surveillance. Federated deep learning (FDL) techniques proposed by Brik 
et al. (2020) address resource limitations and energy inefficiency and, optimize network 
operations and ensure QoS. Zeng et al. (2020) developed framework implementing FL 
algorithms within a UAV swarm where a leading and other UAVs in the framework 
train local FL models on gathered data. It maximises the FL convergence rate consider­
ing the energy and the latency that the swarm’s control mechanism requires. A traffic 
flow prediction (TFP) system based on FL was proposed by Qi et al. (2021). They have 
combined FL-based TFP algorithms and GRU neural networks with Blockchain tech­
nology. By substituting a group of trusted nodes in place of the central server, Block­
chain mitigates the security vulnerabilities associated with both the central server and 
clients. Every local model update is managed by the nodes. Additionally, they safeguard 
the client’s data by implementing DP by incorporating Gaussian noise into local model 
updates. The suggested model performed better in terms of accurate traffic flow predic­
tion when compared to LSTM, stacked autoencoder (SAE) and SVM. In study (Qu et al. 
2021), each UAV shares the final model after combining local models from one-hop 
neighboring UAVs and training a local FL model using its own data. The study shows 
that the difference in cross-entropy loss is smaller when compared to centralized FL.
Measuring the level of privacy users experience within a system, the level of protection 
provided by privacy-enhancing technologies, and resistance to attacks is the aim of pri­
vacy impact analysis, whereas the computational cost, communication cost, scalability, and 
so on affect the performance measure. The performance metrics like accuracy, recall, and 
precision are used to evaluate the federated models, and factors that impact the design and 
efficiency of privacy-preserving federated systems are explained in this section and can be 
considered as the means of privacy and performance analysis. Accuracy metrics are used 
to measure how accurately an adversary can estimate or predict certain characteristics of 

--- Page 35 ---
private data. The study (Wagner and Eckhoff 2018) explains that accuracy of an adver­
sary’s estimate does not directly correlate with privacy, since it doesn’t necessarily reflect 
the adversary’s certainty or correctness. But inaccurate estimates can enhance privacy. The 
reasoning is that when an adversary’s estimate is incorrect, the likelihood of successfully 
extracting sensitive information from the data is reduced, thereby increasing privacy protec­
tion. The aforementioned performance metrics are obtained from four distinct categories as 
shown in Table 9: True/False Positive, denoting situations in which the model accurately or 
incorrectly detects the presence of a class; and True/False Negative, signifying situations in 
which the model correctly or incorrectly detects the absence of a class.

--- Page 36 ---
●
Accuracy: The proportion of all samples that were accurately classified as actually posi­
tive or truly negative. 
●
Recall: Out of all genuine positives, the number of samples that were appropriately 
classified as positive. 
●
Precision: Out of all the samples that were recognised as positive, the number of sam­
ples that were accurately detected as positive. 
Along with prediction accuracy and detection precision, the performance was measured 
with metrics like privacy protection degree with total privacy budget ϵ of the client during 
training and accuracy difference between two prediction accuracy of two training models 
(Le et al. 2023). In this case, stronger privacy protection is indicated by a smaller privacy 
budget.
6.1  Data privacy and correctness
Privacy is obtained by incorporating a combination of privacy-enhancing technologies like 
DP, HE, and SMPC. Each scheme evaluates privacy based on the type of techniques imple­
mented. In study (Cao et al. 2020), parameters like impact on root dataset, poisoned root 
dataset, number of clients, number of malicious clients, etc, are considered to analyze pri­
vacy. The choice of appropriate Gaussian noise impacts the privacy evaluation, as excess 
noise will reduce the utility of data, and inadequate noise does not preserve privacy. The 
most important aspect σ establishes the degree of DP satisfaction and noise size. Evaluate 
the model performance with different values of ϵ and δ values taken where σ is determined 
by ϵ, the privacy loss parameter and δ, parameter that accounts for the probability of the 
failure of the DP. According to Zhao et al. (2021a), as ϵ declines, so does the model accu­
racy for the same value of δ. Additionally, when ϵ is fixed, the value of δ decreases and so 
does the accuracy of the model. A smaller δ suggests that DP is more difficult to be broken. 
Privacy evaluation based on privacy budget estimation, the impact of the maximum privacy 
budget on learning time, convergence rate analysis, examine how the number of devices 
influences the rate of convergence. Zhao et al. (2021a) analyses privacy in terms of prevent­
ing direct leakage and indirect leakage and safeguarding the anonymity of the clients to the 
server. Blockchain-enabled FL has the ability to offer privacy with the use of smart contracts 
to manage model aggregation and update processes in FL. Proof-of-accuracy consensus 
is implemented by the research (Li et al. 2021b), wherein the chain structure guarantees 
immutability and traceability by ensuring that only valid and honest blocks are added to 

--- Page 37 ---
the chain. Wang et al. (2022a) achieves privacy protection via paillier algorithm that shows 
malicious participants cannot decipher ciphertext in polynomial time, and can’t access other 
nodes’ ciphertexts containing model updates. Miao et al. (2022) implements CKKS and 
computing various client ratings or score and model aggregation and thereby meets the 
client requirement of privacy by disabling the solver and verifier from recovering the cli­
ent’s original plaintext. In scheme (Gao et al. 2023a), privacy of participant’s parameter is 
protected with the use CKKS approximate HE. They prove that the cloud server nor the 
trusted authority can access the secret key, and thereby, data leakage can be avoided. By 
verifying the integrity of the uploaded parameters of the aggregated results given to cli­
ents, the technique checks the validity of the aggregated results. DP noise improves privacy 
security and offers measurable privacy protection for the modeling process. According to 
idea of DP, a suitable amount of Gaussian noise can be introduced to datasets to provide 
measurable privacy protection across the entire dataset, thus preventing query attacks. The 
performance can be analyzed various privacy budgets; in general, a smaller privacy budget 
indicates greater data availability, whereas a bigger privacy budget corresponds to a larger 
additional noise scale (Wu et al. 2022). To ensure privacy and high performance, a user-
level privacy-preserving method is introduced, preventing password intrusion, vulnerability 
intrusion, and data disclosure from untrusted third parties (Wu et al. 2022). Wang et al. 
(2023b) proposed gradient encryption algorithm that satisfies correctness because of the 
uniqueness of Lagrange interpolation and privacy by the implementation of Shamir’s secret 
sharing that offers confidentiality via a pseudo-random property. In Wang et al. (2023b), 
all gradient-related calculations are treated as the constraints of a zero-knowledge succinct 
non-interactive argument of knowledge (zk-SNARK) to produce a local gradient proof that 
cannot be falsified, thus validating the trustworthiness of the local gradient.
6.2  Resistance to attacks
For the purpose of evaluating models against attacks, Cao et al. (2020) took into account 
attacks such as data and model poisoning, in addition to the krum, trim and scaling attacks. 
These attacks raise the test error rate, and hence, they were taken into consideration when 
evaluating the model. Data poisoning impacts the model’s accuracy, whereas model poison­
ing hinders the convergence of the model. Li et al. (2020b) relies on committee consensus to 
resist malicious attacks. Li et al. (2021b) performs random and reverse poisoning detection 
to filter the malicious data holders and malicious miners. In order to determine the effective­
ness of multi-krum, authors used the dataset to assess the impact of changing the proportion 
of overall updates using multi-krum in each round against the different poisoning rates. The 
impact of malicious nodes is observed to test performance on model accuracy (Wang et al. 
2022a). They simulated label-flipping poisoning attacks and showed that more malicious 
nodes would have a greater impact on accuracy. It recommends clients increase the reputa­
tion threshold while keeping a low screening ratio to decrease the likelihood of malicious 
users taking part in the training. Gao et al. (2023b) is an asynchronous FL with a server that 
evaluates the model accuracy by the proportion of malicious clients among the total number 
of clients and demonstrates the effectiveness of the quality-based aggregation method. Data 
poisoning is avoided using the screening algorithm that prevents the replacement of data 
and labels in Wang et al. (2023b). Model Poisoning is handled with the use of gradient local 
proof generation in Wang et al. (2023b). Marx et al. (2023) performs analysis by considering 

--- Page 38 ---
a subset of clients to be malicious and also maliciously corrupt certain multi-party comput­
ing clusters and considering only static adversaries.
6.3  Computational cost
Blockchain-enabled FL brings large computational burden brought due to blockchain’s 
privacy-preserving measure making it a major disadvantage. Although they demand a lot 
of processing power, methods like SMPC, HE, ZKPs and cryptographic encryption are cru­
cial for maintaining data confidentiality and integrity but require extensive computational 
resources. Particularly when implemented in resource-constrained situations like edge 
devices, these privacy techniques can have a substantial effect on system performance by 
raising latency in model training and aggregation, using more energy, and possibly creating 
bottlenecks. Furthermore, by introducing extra processing delays, consensus techniques like 
proof-of-work (PoW) and proof-of-stake (PoS) can make these difficulties much worse. FL 
and blockchain integration must therefore balance between privacy and efficiency by using 
off-chain processing solutions, optimized cryptographic protocols, and hardware accelera­
tors like GPUs and TPUs to increase computational efficiency without sacrificing privacy 
and security. Computational cost can be calculated based on the initialization phase, proof 
generation and verification, and lastly, aggregation & update phase. Wang et al. (2023b) 
noted that as the length of the gradient vector grows, the time required for Paillier encryp­
tion, decryption, and addition also increases significantly. Shayan et al. (2021) allocates the 
majority of its time to the aggregation phase, as the aggregators must gather secret shares 
from all approved updates and exchange the aggregated shares among themselves to con­
struct a block. Miao et al. (2022); Sezer et al. (2023) evaluate the performance in on and 
off-chain phases. During the on-chain phase, uploading data to the Blockchain incurs a gas 
fee. Gas costs are regarded as a performance metric, and Miao et al. (2022) minimizes gas 
consumption by uploading only the results to the Blockchain, leaving the more intensive 
computations to be handled by the server. In scheme (Sezer et al. 2023), network delays 
can affect the system and increase the computing load. Every transaction is guaranteed to 
be authentic and legitimate by a digital signature, and the computational complexity of the 
algorithm is determined by the size of the algorithm’s key. Because the digital signature 
is utilized for verification and the same key size is employed (Sezer et al. 2023), the com­
plexity of each transaction is linear. Average computational cost increases as the number 
of groups increases, and the group size has an impact on the efficiency (Gao et al. 2023b). 
When a significant number of users use privacy-preserving techniques, they incur compu­
tational expense. While differential privacy is more effective with lower model accuracy, 
homomorphic encryption has a much higher processing overhead, particularly when there 
are many gradients (Chen et al. 2023). After aggregating ciphertexts through homomorphic 
addition and performing partial decryption (Almashaqbeh and Ghodsi 2023), the model 
owner obtains the result. While the cost of aggregating ciphertexts increases with the num­
ber of clients, the decryption cost is determined only by the model’s size. Usually, the gra­
dient descent algorithm has the learning rate parameter set to 0.01. The SGD algorithm is 
more prone to variations in the learning rate, even if it performs better with initial learning 
rates. SGD’s performance is more consistent at a fixed learning rate, resulting in a single 
gradient descent direction at the same learning rate. So, comparison of the robustness of 

--- Page 39 ---
various algorithms with learning rate is an essential metric for performance evaluation (Wu 
et al. 2022).
6.4  Communication cost
Communication cost refers to the expenses incurred from the size of the packets transmitted 
between clients and the server; the messages exchanged during handshakes, and the transfer 
of authentication information, as well as communication between clients (Kanchan et al. 
2023). While the packets sent from the server to the clients remain unchanged, each client 
sends encrypted messages along with additional messages, such as signatures or secret keys, 
to ensure privacy protection. Calculating the total number of messages transmitted per itera­
tion is based on factors such as the total number of clients and the number of clients selected 
for each iteration. The time spent on encryption, decryption, and waiting for the client to 
return the result account for the majority of the aggregation time cost (Wang et al. 2023a). 
Minimal overhead in communication demonstrates the responsiveness of the model, lowers 
error rates, and improves practicality. In schemes that contain encryption, consider gradient 
vector length & size of ciphertext to analyze the communication overheads of the encryption 
scheme (Wang et al. 2023b). Depending on the technique used, communication overheads 
may rise or fall as the node dropout rate rises. It has been shown communication overhead 
decreases with an increase in dropouts (Wang et al. 2023b). The fog-based IoT approach 
(Baucas et al. 2023) clusters the wearable IoT devices, making them the new workers rather 
than each one being a distinct worker. This offsets the training and other overheads and 
lessens the effect of the variety of wearable IoT devices on the total update time. Sub-
aggregators are the only source of additional overhead (Chen et al. 2023). Each node’s cost 
increases linearly with the gradient size since it directly impacts the transmitted data size. 
Since all nodes transmit a copy of the parameters, the number of users and sub-aggrega­
tors does not impact each node’s communication overhead. To improve communication 
efficiency in FL, two primary approaches can be considered: iterative sending of smaller 
messages or reducing the total number of communication rounds (Zhang et al. 2021). An 
effective strategy to minimize the size of transmitted data is model compression techniques, 
which help optimize bandwidth usage (Lang et al. 2023a, b; Nguyen et al. 2022). Addition­
ally, reducing communication rounds can be achieved by selectively transmitting only the 
most critical model updates based on their significance (Zhao et al. 2021a). A combination 
of these methods can significantly lower communication costs between mobile devices and 
servers; however, this may lead to an increase in computational overhead. Striking an opti­
mal balance between communication efficiency and computational demands remains a key 
challenge and an important direction for future research.
6.5  Scalability
The openness of FL, which allows nodes to join or leave the FL task without affecting the 
FL process, is called scalability. Here, the nodes are not predefined or preconfigured, which 
supports scalability. Every node participates in the same number of rounds in synchronous 
FL, while in asynchronous FL, the gradient ciphertexts are aggregated by a certain number 
of nodes, regardless of whether they are in the same round. Scheme (Wang et al. 2023b) is 
suitable for synchronous and asynchronous FL and supports scalability. Wang et al. (2023b) 

--- Page 40 ---
applies to both synchronous and asynchronous FL and is designed to support scalability. 
Shayan et al. (2021) findings indicate that as the noising aggregator increases, the time per 
iteration also increases, resulting in higher overhead due to the exchange of secret shares 
between more peers, which in turn requires greater coordination during aggregation. In 
Ethereum systems, event-based contracts and off-chain usage, that is, low gas consumption, 
give positive results in terms of scalability (Sezer et al. 2023). The study (Gu et al. 2024) 
investigates the impact of thermal stress on FL performance in distributed systems based on 
large-scale heterogeneous IoT with low-power devices. It analyzes several metrics, such as 
training time, CPU/GPU utilization, temperature, and power consumption, under varying 
thermal stress scenarios. The findings reveal that even a small number of devices experienc­
ing thermal stress can cause a decrease in both the global model and the overall performance 
of the system. Furthermore, the study emphasizes that the more clients are affected by ther­
mal stress, the greater the negative impact on the performance of the federated learning 
system.
This section outlines the implementation of existing schemes and the various datasets com­
monly used in the literature to support future research. Table 11 gives ideas of existing 
implementations that can be explored further, and Table 12 lists the datasets. This section 
also discusses the challenges and key areas of concern that need to be addressed in the 
domain of FL. In spite of various literature and studies, there are a few areas of concern that 
can be explored further, namely:
●
Robust FL to manage diverse data: More flexible FL framework that can handle clients 
with heterogeneous datasets is required as clients’ data might vary greatly and include 
various formats including text, photos, and video. This can be achieved by utilizing en­
semble learning techniques to effectively merge the dynamic models shared by 

[... TRUNCATED — full text exceeds context limit ...]