
--- Page 1 ---
Athens Journal of Law - Volume 10, Issue 1, January 2024 – Pages 47-62 
increase in the volume of data generated, the content of which represents a 
high impact for businesses, citizens, and the public sector on the whole. This is 
the underlying motivation behind the approval of the Data Act, the new EU 
regulatory framework based on clear rules on data sharing, a fair and guided 
data economy in the European Union. 
Data Circulation; Access; Sharing; Interoperability. 
This paper deals with the concept of data as a legal asset within the recent 
European legislation. Since the last century, Information and Communication 
Technologies (ICTs) have taken on a fundamental role in the lives of individuals 
and organisations. Contemporary society is generally now defined as an information 
society, since data is a central element and a precious resource both for 
technological and economic evolution with a high impact on businesses, citizens, 
and the public sector on the whole. Further explained below in the investigation, 
data-based technologies and data access take on a more concrete relevance every 
day. The constant increase in Internet products corresponds to an increase in the 
volume of data generated, the content of which represents a fundamental 
development factor for technological evolution and with a high potential for 
businesses, citizens and for sustainable economic growth and recovery . In 
general, it is related to the benefit of digitalisation in terms of security, geopolitical 
https://doi.org/10.30958/ajl.10-1-3 doi=10.30958/ajl.10-1-3 

--- Page 2 ---
resilience, and strategic autonomy of the Union . At present, the advantages 
offered by the digital age are also balanced by the risks of the invasiveness of new 
technologies. In particular, those based on artificial intelligence have automated 
decisions with the added risk of significantly impacting the rights and freedoms of 
individuals. 
The topic under investigation ranks highly among European policies in the 
digital world. In this field, Art. 8 of the European Charter of fundamental rights 
states that every individual is entitled to have their personal information protected 
(par. 1); this personal data must be treated in a fair and legal way for specified 
purposes and on the basis of the consent of the person concerned or some other 
legitimate basis laid down by law; these data are made available to individuals 
requesting copies, to be rectified if erroneous (par. 2); an independent authority is 
responsible for monitoring compliance with data protection rules (par. 3). 
The protection of natural persons in relation to the processing of personal data 
concerning them is also protected in Article 16 of the Treaty on the Functioning of 
the European Union, which constitutes a specific legal basis for the adoption of 
legislative acts relating to data protection. Before the introduction of the European 
Charter, Art. 8 of ECHR protected the right to respect for family and private life. 
This right was further protected by the Council of Europe Strasbourg Convention 
Data of 1981 which was the first binding international document protecting the 
individual against possible abuses of collecting and processing personal data, 
processing of individuals’ “sensitive” data in absence of proper legal safeguards. 
The Preamble of this Convention recalls “the right to the respect for privacy, 
taking account of the increasing flow across frontiers of personal data undergoing 
automatic processing.” Art. 2 defines “personal data” as any information relating 
to “an identified or identifiable individual (data subject).” The Convention also 
preserved the individual’s right to know that information on him or her is stored 
and, if necessary, to have it corrected. The Convention also admitted restriction on 
the rights in presence of overriding interests (e.g., State security, defence, etc.) and 
it imposed some restrictions on transborder flows of personal data to States in case 
of no equivalent protection. The European Court of Human Rights has brought the 
protection of personal data back to the protection of confidentiality by leveraging 
the Strasbourg Convention n. 108 of 1981 . 
In principle, the collection, storage, and any processing of “personal data” is 
an interference with “privacy” and the right to protection of “personal data” under 
both ECHR and EU law. 
Nowadays, among European documents, there is another steppingstone to 
bear in mind: the Declaration on European digital rights and principles, approved 
in January 2023, which lays down a set of principles for the digital transition 
48 

--- Page 3 ---
according to European values. The Declaration illustrates the EU’s commitment to 
a safe, secure, and sustainable digital transformation that puts people and human 
rights at the centre, in line with EU values and fundamental rights. The approval of 
this Declaration reflects the political commitment of the EU and its Member States 
to promote and implement these fundamental principles in all areas of digital 
environment and to achieve the objectives of the Digital Compass 2030. This 
Declaration aims to be a guide for the Digital Decade 2030 Strategic Agenda. Its 
political program establishes an annual cooperation cycle to achieve common 
objectives and targets, based on an annual cooperation mechanism involving the 
Commission and the Member States. 
Returning to secondary European law, in the context of this research, it is 
useful to retrace the main stages in terms of data protection. 
In the context of protecting individual rights, during the last decade of the 20
century the “Mother Directive” in data protection (n. 95/46/EC) had the merit of 
breaking down borders to guarantee a free flow of data for the first time in history, 
granting protection to natural persons in the balance between personal protection 
and free movement of data within the EU, in view of protecting innovation and the 
fundamental right of the individual to control information concerning him . 
In 2002, we had the E-privacy Directive which pointed out more specific 
privacy rights in the field of electronic communications , including rules of any 
personal and non-personal data storing and access from terminal equipment. But it 
was not until 2018 that this made a determining turning point when, in fact, the 
GDPR (General Data Protection Regulation – Reg. UE 679/2016) came into 
effect: a strategic tool for the digital single market in Europe with the aim of 
regulating the right to protection of personal data considering its social function. 
The regulation entered into force on 24 May 2016 and has been applied since 25 
May 2018. It repealed the “Mother Directive,” deemed appropriate to better 
harmonise the regulation of personal data protection in the EU through a 
regulation (characterised by direct applicability throughout the EU territory 
without the need for transposition acts) rather than through a directive. 
These EU acts provide the basis for sustainable and responsible data 
processing, combining in some cases personal and non-personal data. 
In Italy, the adaptation of internal legislation to the GDPR took place with the 
Legislative Decree n. 101/2018 which modified the Privacy Code (Legislative 
Decree n. 196/2003) conforming it to the principles of the GDPR. 
Directive (EU) 2016/680 on the protection of natural persons regarding 
processing of personal data connected with criminal offences or the execution of 
criminal penalties, and on the free movement of such data is another important text 
in this field . Furthermore, the EUDPR (Data Protection Regulation for the 
49 

--- Page 4 ---
provided the rules applicable to the processing of personal data by EU institutions, 
bodies, offices and agencies in line with the high standards of data protection 
prescribed by the GDPR. It has been applied since 11 December 2018, when it 
repealed and replaced its predecessor, Reg. (EC) 45/2001 . Moreover, in 2018 the 
Regulation on free flow of data aims to ensure that electronic data, apart from 
personal data, can be processed freely throughout the EU . 
Thanks to all these instruments, we have a European legislation and public 
enforcement for the protection of personal data and a European Data Protection 
Board (EDPB) responsible for ensuring the application of European rules (Artt. 63 
to 76 and Recitals 135 to 140 of GDPR). The EDPB ensures that data protection 
law is applied consistently across the EU and it works to ensure effective 
cooperation amongst Data Protection Authorities. The Board adopts guidelines on 
the application of the GDPR and it also issues binding decisions on disputes 
regarding cross-border processing, thereby ensuring a uniform application of EU 
rules. 
All this considered, we must bear in mind that, in the contemporary data 
driven economy, EU policies place their emphasis on data circulation, rather than 
focusing attention exclusively on data protection and data subjects’ fundamental 
right to control. Precisely by virtue of recent political trends, in the European 
Union the attention to data regulation in the digital economy has undergone a 
decisive change. Recent regulatory interventions, fundamental pieces of the 
European data strategy , introduced by the Open Data Directive , aim to 
increase trust in data sharing, strengthen mechanisms to increase data availability 
and overcome technical obstacles to data reuse, with the aim of creating a single 
market for the exchange and reuse of data both in public and private areas . 
Emphasis is placed on the circulation, sharing, interoperability (and not only 
portability) of data as the new challenges and pillars of the European data strategy. 
Once considered that the goal is “A Europe fit for the digital age” , new rules are 
always required for the benefit of the EU digital environment . Thus, the focus is 
changed: the emphasis becomes more marked on data circulation and above all the 
model of reuse and sharing is defined, both in a public and private perspective. 
50 

--- Page 5 ---
Keeping this in mind, it is useful to point out that personal and non-personal 
(such as industrial or commercial) data represents a key element for the digital 
economy; it is an increasingly valued resource for the market and a tool to ensure 
green and digital transition, although most remain unused or accessible only to a 
small number of large companies. Economic growth and a competitive, multi-
player and fair market economy need rules of interoperability and access to data 
for actors of all sizes, to contrast the market imbalances. 
Accordingly, the European Commission Communication “A European 
strategy for data” (February 2020) aims to establish the EU as a leader in the 
data-driven society. The Commission Work Programme 2020 sets out several 
strategic objectives, including the European strategy for data, adopted in February 
2020. That strategy aims at building a genuine single market for data promoting 
transparency, security, non-discrimination, accountability, interoperability, sharing, 
access, and portability of data . 
The protection of internal market, free competition and circulation are clearly 
the main goals of the Commission’s action which works in different aspects: 
networks and services (with the Digital Services Act); platforms and competition 
(with the Digital Market Act); the sharing of personal and non-personal data 
between the public and private sectors (with the Digital Governance Act); and 
accessibility to the value represented by that data (finally, with the Data Act) . 
In the Resolution of 31 March 2021 European strategy for data the 
European Parliament welcomes the Commission strategy for data while believing 
“that the strategy will be a prerequisite for the viability of European businesses 
and their global competitiveness and for the progress of universities, research 
centres and nascent AI, and marks a crucial step towards building a data society 
rooted in rights and EU values, defining the conditions for and establishing of the 
Union’s leading role in the data economy. This leads to better services, sustainable 
growth and quality jobs; considers that ensuring trust in digital services and in safe 
smart products is fundamental for the digital single market to grow and thrive, and 
should be at the core of both public policy and business models.” The Resolution 
51 

--- Page 6 ---
also notes that “the Commission should ensure competitive markets through 
interoperability, portability and open infrastructures, and remain vigilant about any 
potential abuses of market power by dominant actors.” Digital markets are in fact 
characterised by high entry barriers relating to access to and ownership of data. 
Regulating the sharing of data and unlocking data markets may represent one 
possible way to correct these shortcomings . 
All this is considered in the European data strategy. A single market where 
data flows freely within the EU and across all sectors is seen as a benefit for 
businesses, researchers, and public administrations and this is the final goal of the 
model proposed by the EU. Data is assumed as a key building block of the digital 
economy and an essential tool to ensure green and digital transitions. Our society 
is more interconnected every day, with an incremental increase in devices and data 
produced by citizens and businesses. However, most of this data remains largely 
unused or accessible only to a small number of large companies, with a significant 
detriment to the potential value that would be derives from full use. 
For these reasons, data is considered “the new oil” - as we also read in a 
widely referenced article by The Economist . While the volume of data continues 
to rise and it is owned only by the large digital firms, the issue is how to manage 
data in a way that ensures adequate competition. 
Bearing this in mind, the European strategy is aimed at creating a single 
market for data, to create a space where data is available for use in the economy 
and society, while maintaining the control of businesses and individuals 
generating the data and contributing to social improvement in important fields 
such as health care, sustainability, and energy efficiency. 
Regulating data access and use is considered a fundamental step toward 
seizing the opportunities of the data driven society. In this context, the Data Act, 
the new EU Regulation adopted November 27, 2023 is a key pillar and the second 
major initiative in the data strategy (after the Data Governance Act). It contributes 
to the creation of a cross-sectoral governance framework for data access and use, 
by legislating on matters that affect relations between data economy actors, to 
build a horizontal data sharing system. The new regulation aims to create a 
European regulatory framework based on clear rules aimed at allowing the 
conditions for a fair and guided economy from data in the European Union. 
Over the last decade, there has been a significant increase in connected 
devices and greater human-machine interaction, which has corresponded to a 
proportional increase in data generated. This is a trend destined to grow. In fact, 
according to forecast estimates from the European Commission, by 2025 the 
global volume of data will increase by 530%, with an economic value of 829 
million euros. 
52 

--- Page 7 ---
Beyond strictly numerical indices, there is no doubt that data represents an 
element of essential strategic value in the digital economy, by virtue of its high 
potential in the context of the digital and ecological transition. For example, it 
has been observed that companies that base their innovation plans on data 
record a 5% - 10% faster growth in productivity than others. 
In a context of undoubted opportunities, however, we observe that this 
potential is not fully exploited, due to various reasons. 
First, the management of large data sources requires substantial investments 
for the maintenance of technological infrastructures for which proportional 
economic investments are also necessary. This limit is further hindered by the 
lack of specific incentives and ease of access to them, which represents a 
structural block for the acquisition of concrete tools. 
Secondly, to take full advantage of data analysis, it is essential to have 
adequate skills, especially digital ones. 
Further categories of causes are also of a regulatory nature, due to the lack 
of specific provisions regulating the standards and fundamental aspects 
underlying the interoperability of data and between data and services, as well as 
the concentrations of the same within the circle of large companies, even when 
due to contractual abuse. This last circumstance is partly due to the abuse of 
dominant positions or contractual positions unbalanced in the use and sharing of 
the data produced. 
Despite the copious regulatory production, which will also be partially 
examined, the reviewed framework highlights the persistence of strong needs 
for intervention to implement the European strategies already examined. This 
need is therefore the basis of the new Data Act, as a key pillar of the European 
data strategy. 
The distinctive element of the Data Act is to make available a greater 
quantity of data, personal and non-personal, relating to connected products or 
related services, making them accessible to users and usable through a clear 
system of rules, in all sectors/economies of the Union. The desired effect is 
therefore to expand the data market, including manufacturers of connected 
products and providers of related services. In addition to this commercial line, 
this legislation aims to promote a greater balance in the use of data, regulating a 
uniform distribution free of barriers or anomalous concentrations, respecting the 
rights of the parties involved, mainly data subjects and small and medium- sized 
enterprises . 
These assumptions are the basis of the creation of a circular context, in 
which data are freer to circulate in interconnected and interoperable 
environments, according to certain, effective rules, all to create a reliable system 
that can generate confidence in the use of such systems. 
This is a regulation developed following a complex process, starting with a 
legislative proposal formally presented by the Commission in 2022 , following 
53 

--- Page 8 ---
a specific public consultation phase , which has now finally been approved by 
Council of European Union and has reached the final approval phase . After 
publication in the EU’s official journal, it shall apply from 20 months from the 
date of its entry into force. However, the requirements for simplified access to 
data for new products (article 3, paragraph 1), shall apply to connected products 
and the services related to them placed on the market after 32 months from the 
date of entry into force of the regulation.
Among the main objectives pursued is that of facilitating, for businesses 
and consumers, access to data obtained or generated by the use of a connected 
product or related service , with the possibility to use or transfer them to third 
parties indicated by the user. 
For this purpose, the legislation sets up a system based on transparency and 
accessibility to information, dictating specific requirements starting from the 
design of the same, up to the transfer, in the cases provided for by the legislation. 
In particular, it is established , by default, that connected product and 
related services are designed, manufactured and delivered in such a way that the 
product data and related service data, including relevant metadata necessary to 
interpret and use such data, are easily accessible in a secure, free manner, in a 
complete, structured, commonly used and machine-readable format and directly 
accessible to users. 
However, the legislation intervenes in a very incisive manner in the 
information, pre-contractual and contractual context, in the cases of sale, rental 
or leasing of a connected product and with respect to the supply of connected 
services. 
The emerging framework presents a strengthening of transparency 
requirements, not only with respect to the form but also with regard to the list of 
specific technical and informational details. 
54 

--- Page 9 ---
With regard to pre-contractual obligations in relation to the purchase, rent 
or sale of a connected product, information relating to the characteristics, 
volume and methods of creation, saving, access and management of the data 
produced must be indicated. In this category, the fundamental request to make 
known to the user the forms of access, the conditions of use and the quality of 
the service is highlighted . 
The same provisions are envisaged for related services, in relation to which 
all data produced by the digitalisation of user actions or events relating to the 
connected product, generated during the supply of the same, are placed. In 
addition to what has already been examined with regard to the nature and 
volume of the data, specific indications are imposed regarding the identity of 
the prospective data holder and the means of communications with which it is 
possible and easy to contact him, the methods with which the user can request 
that the data are shared with a third party and where applicable, end the data 
sharing. 
With respect to this last aspect, also following the strong debates that took 
place during the negotiations, it was specified that it must be made known 
whether the prospective data holder is also the holder of the trade secret 
contained in the data that is accessible from the connected product or generated 
during the provision of a related service or otherwise the actual trade secret 
holder . 
The legislation then provides a clear system of rules regarding the sharing 
of data obtained or generated by the use of related products or services, 
especially with regard to access and usage rights, providing for a mandatory 
obligation to make such data available. This access must take place in a simple 
manner, complete with all the elements necessary to interpret the data, to the 
same extent as those held by the data holder, without unjustified delay and upon 
simple request . Any limitations must be contractually foreseen between the 
parties, except in cases specifically provided for by the law such as compromising 
the safety of the device or service itself . 
Due to the strong margin of access rights, the need to protect trade secrets 
emerged already during the negotiations. The problem that emerged during the 
discussion was linked to the fact that blocking access on this point could have 
resulted in defeating the purpose underlying the entire legislation. On the other 
hand, allowing unconditional access would have compromised the business 
integrity of the companies involved. Therefore, the solution adopted is placed 
on a median level, generally providing that commercial secrets must be 
preserved and disclosed only if data holders and users adopt all necessary 
measures to preserve its confidentiality, especially with respect to third parties . 
55 

--- Page 10 ---
In the absence of such guarantees or if the user does not take the agreed 
measures, the law authorises the data holder not to communicate the requested 
information. However, given the extremely delicate nature of the matter in 
question, the legislator has admitted that the data holders can refuse the access 
request if they can demonstrate that it is highly probable that serious economic 
damage could result from the disclosure, despite the measures adopted. 
This provision acquires an even more interesting connotation when one 
considers its dynamics in the case of a user’s request to share data with third 
parties. The emerging risk is that of exposing potential trade secrets to other 
entities in a potential competitive position. In balancing this situation with the 
right to request transfer by the user, the law recognises a specific provision of 
protection, especially due to the possible obvious exposure of the contents of 
the trade secret to potential competitor companies. With respect to this need, a 
specific protection is in fact specifically provided for , where disclosure is 
limited only to cases in which it is necessary to fulfil the purpose agreed upon 
between the user and the third party. If so, the data holder or the trade secret 
holder shall identify the data which are protected as trade secrets and provide 
appropriate measures for the transfer. Even in these cases the exceptions already 
observed with regard to the opposition apply, in cases where the disclosure 
could lead to serious economic damage for the company or suspension, if the 
third party does not implement the identified measures or undermines the 
confidentiality of the trade secrets. 
The Protection Needs of Smaller Companies in the Context of Access to Data 
On the basis of a real and fair sharing context, it is essential that there are 
no prevarications or imbalances that jeopardise the rights of contractually 
weaker counterparties. In particular, in order to rebalance the negotiating power 
in contracts between professionals, especially to protect microenterprises, small 
and medium-sized enterprises , often compromised by contractual imbalances 
in data sharing contracts, the Data Act imposes a margin of protection against 
unfair contractual clauses imposed by a stronger contractual counterparty . 
In relations between companies, the legislation unequivocally clarifies its 
position as a guarantee towards an exchange of data based on equity and 
correctness, imposing fair, reasonable, non-discriminatory, and formulated 
terms and conditions in a transparent manner. Furthermore, to avoid abusive 
contractual conditions with respect to access or use of data or the limitation of 
liability and recovery and protection tools, it must be considered non-binding or 
non-applicable, where contrary to a right of the user. 
56 

--- Page 11 ---
Especially with regard to the regulation of contractual relationships 
between companies, the legislation contains a specific provision of those cases 
in which a contractual clause must be considered, respectively, abusive or 
presumably abusive . 
To safeguard this framework of guarantees, the right to reasonable 
compensation for companies for making data available is also specified, which 
must be fair and non-discriminatory, as well as providing for adequate dispute 
resolution mechanisms . 
A further aspect concerns the obligations to share and use the data held by 
companies, by public bodies and institutions, agencies or bodies of the Union. 
This provision certainly includes all those in which circumstances arise that 
justify an exceptional need for data. However, they can also refer to all those 
hypotheses in which the mandatory sharing of data between companies and 
public administrations is justified in order to support public policies and 
services based on concrete, effective, efficient and results-oriented data. This is 
another area heavily discussed in the dialogue phase, since on the one hand 
greater openness towards this type of sharing brings undoubted advantages but 
can, at the same time, be unsustainable for data holders. Therefore, to safeguard 
these conflicting needs, the most correct choice is to precisely limit the 
categories of cases of access to such data and impose specific obligations of 
justification in the request for access by authorised public entities . 
The rich framework of facilitations for access to data provided by the Data 
Act involves the inevitable interaction with many vertical regulations, including 
the Data Governance Act , the Data Base Directive , the Regulation on free 
flow of data and the GDPR, most of which we already mentioned before, and 
on which we will focus more carefully. 
Before proceeding with this analysis, we can only start from the 
consideration that the Data Act is part of an enormous European regulatory 
context, part of the European data strategy , within which it must be examined 
and considered. 
57 

--- Page 12 ---
First, we can consider the innovative force dictated by the Data Governance 
Act (“DGA”), which has the merit of creating the processes and structures to 
facilitate the sharing of data by companies, citizens and public enterprises. 
Among these, it is interesting to observe, for example, the rules relating to the 
so-called “data altruism” , the reuse of data held by public bodies, 
intermediation services and one-stop shops for data. The DGA has therefore 
created the basis on which the collection flow set by the Data Act is based, with 
its rules aimed at making an even greater number of data available and usable, 
in particular that generated by the use of connected products and related 
services, identifying the categories of subjects authorised to access, use and 
dispose of such information. 
With regard, however, to some specific regulations of more immediate 
convergence, the Data Act directly provides for specific provisions, aimed at 
identifying the relationships of possible interaction, for a more harmonious 
regulatory application. 
In this sense, we can consider all the cases in which the provisions of the 
Data Act prevent any prejudice to aspects already regulated by further 
regulations, including those on the protection of intellectual property rights , 
on the use and access of data for statistical purposes . 
However, the hypothesis of Directive 96/9/ EC, relating to the legal 
protection of databases, established the so-called sui generis right , which 
protects the contents of databases.. This right in particular has been declared 
inapplicable in eliminating the risk that owners of data may claim the sui 
generis right. 
Although apparently pervasive, it should be highlighted that the exercise of 
this right could in fact represent an obstacle to the exercise of the rights 
recognised by the Data Act, thus nullifying its innovative significance. 
However, recital 112 specifies that this right continues to operate outside the 
scope of application of the Data Act, provided however that this does not result 
in a violation of protection within the scope guaranteed by the law. 
Another regulation that deserves a comparative analysis with the Data Act 
is the regulation on the free circulation of non-personal data , a regulatory act 
of great importance in the European data economy. 
58 

--- Page 13 ---
Among the most important elements, it is highlighted that this Regulation, 
through specific provisions aimed at digital service providers, has imposed the 
commitment to develop and implement self-regulatory codes of conduct to 
facilitate the change of providers of services and the porting of date. 
Despite the excellent premises, the conditions envisaged by this Regulation 
have not brought the desired results, as there has been neither a high rate of 
adoption of these self-regulatory tools nor an increase in open standards and 
interfaces; hence, the central importance of the Data Act in providing for 
minimum regulatory obligations directed at suppliers of data processing 
services, aimed at eliminating those barriers, of a technical or contractual 
nature, which limit or hinder the transfer of user data and the switching from 
one processing service to another. The Data Act, therefore, complements the 
regulatory approach envisaged by the General Data Protection Regulation , 
adding generally applicable obligations on the transition to the cloud. 
The Data Act and Relations with the Regulations on the processing of Personal 
Due to the common object that unites them, the processing of data for data 
subjects, the Data Act is intimately linked to the current legislation on the 
processing of personal data and the protection of privacy in the electronic 
communications sector, referred to in the Regulation 2016/679 and Directive 
2002/58/EC. In fact, the use of a connected product or a related service, in case 
of personal data referable to a natural identified or identifiable person , make 
the privacy legislation applicable. Already in the first recitals of the Data Act, 
the relationship with this legislation is examined, addressed as the first 
methodological premise underlying the entire legislation. 
The absolute absence of any prejudice with respect to the regulations on 
the protection of personal data, privacy and confidentiality of communications 
and integrity of terminal equipment is therefore preliminarily established , 
especially with regard to the areas of competence of the supervisory authorities 
and the rights recognised to data subjects. 
Since at the basis of the proposed Regulation of the Data Act, the 
expansion of the data produced is associated with a rigid regulation of access 
systems, it is precisely on the rights of the interested parties, specifically those 
of access and portability , that these two regulations must intertwine more 
often. 
In fact, given the multiple provisions contained in the Data Act, sometimes 
even restrictive to protect the interests of the parties involved, as in the case of 
contexts in which trade secrets are present, the need to frame the interested 
59 

--- Page 14 ---
party’s power of control over his/her own personal data emerges . For this 
reason, the Data Act provides that when users are also data subjects, therefore 
recipients of the rights provided for by articles 15 and 20, in the event of 
conflict with the provisions of the Data Act the provisions of the GDPR will 
instead prevail . 
A further, very significant clarification, highlighting the supremacy of the 
current privacy legislation, is the explicit provision that the Data Act cannot be 
considered a legal basis pursuant to art. 6 of Regulation (EU) 2016/679 for the 
collection and creation of data by data holders . Therefore, the initial 
requirement to be satisfied is always that of compliance with the processing of 
personal data, precisely the principle of lawfulness of the processing which 
therefore represents the prerequisite on which the structure envisaged by the 
Data Act is based. On the basis of this premise, we also understand the 
reference to the necessary application of minimisation in the context of the 
application of the principle of privacy by design and privacy by default , as a 
tool to safeguard the protection of the data being processed. 
The framework reviewed therefore represents the governance context of 
this new category of data, both with regard to their qualitative and quantitative 
structure and with regard to the rights recognised to data subjects. The aim is to 
fill the information gap of the interested party, now faced with a new category 
of data and to make him/her a conscious and active part of the application of the 
rights that are recognised by the GDPR and which the Data Act Proposal does 
not intend in any way to compromise. The circulation of such data, however, in 
which the personal component is largely combined with a prevalent amount of 
non-personal data, is also a direct fulfilment of the data holders and data 
recipients, i.e. those actors in the commercial circulation segment, called to 
correctly manage the most relevant phase, that of production and use, in the 
context of their exploitation and valorisation. 
The goal of the European Data Strategy is the construction of a Digital 
Single Market that puts the person at the centre of digital transformation and 
makes the European digital space safe and competitive. Accordingly, the 
European Declaration on digital rights and principles for the digital decade is a 
suitable tool for enhancing and defending democratic and personalistic values 
online as well as offline (art. 1). 
60 

--- Page 15 ---
Following the Data Governance Act, Data Act regulation is a tool to 
consolidate the role of the EU and to compete on a global scale with world 
economic giants. In particular, the removal of barriers that currently limit the 
interoperability of data represents a fundamental development factor for the 
internal digital market, to the advantage of competitiveness, innovation, and 
sustainable economic growth. To create such a framework, EU politics opts for 
legal harmonisation – through the introduction of an EU regulation – bypassing 
the fragmentations of national legislations, with clear rules regarding the 
identification of who has the right to use the data collected, obtained or 
otherwise generated by connected products or digital services. The huge scope 
of this new legislation already highlights the first undisputed advantage in 
favour of SMEs, today in fact limited by the benefits deriving from access to 
such data both due to the lack of digital skills to collect, analyse and use them 
and due to the non-existent information interoperability with the operators who 
hold them. The EU recently adopted its position on this issue, providing for 
more measures to allow users to access the data they generate and increasing the 
guarantees of data sharing agreements between companies. In conclusion, the 
EU Data Act appears suitable to rebalance the negotiating power to protect 
weaker companies, identifying greater protection with respect to possible 
contractual imbalances with companies in a dominant position. The regulatory 
process still provides for several steps. However, we can already speak of a 
framework based on clear rules that lay the foundations for concrete growth 
with real advantages for citizens, businesses and the public administration . 
Cerrina Feroni, G. (2022), ʿLuci e ombre della Data Strategy europeaʾ, in Agendadigitale.eu, 
12 May 2022. 
unitaria. Rome: Giuffrè. 
Chiarella, M.L. (2023). ʿDigital Market Act (DMA) and Digital Service Act (DSA): New 
Rules for the EU Digital Environmentʾ, in Athens Journal of Law, 9(1): 33-58, and in 
Frenkel, D.A. (ed.) (2023), A Current Anthology of Law, pp.33-57. Athens, Greece: 
Atiner. 
Dąbrowski, Ł.D. & M. Suska (eds.). (2022). The European Union Digital Single Market. 
Europe’s digital Transformation. London and New York: Routledge. 
De Franceschi, A. (2017). La circolazione dei dati personali tra privacy e contratto. 
Naples: Edizioni Scientifiche Italiane. 
Di Raimo, R. (2003). Autonomia privata e dinamiche del consenso. Naples: Edizioni 
Scientifiche Italiane. 
Irti, C. (2021). Consenso negoziato e circolazione dei dati personali. Turin: Giappichelli. 
Humby, C. (2017). ʿThe world’s most valuable resource is no longer oil, but dataʾ, in The 
Economist, 6 of May. 
61 

--- Page 16 ---
Kerber, W. (2023), ʿGovernance of IoT Data: Why the EU Data Act Will not Fulfill Its 
Objectivesʾ, in GRUR International 72(2):120-135. 
Martinez, A.G. (2019). ʿNo, Data Is Not the New Oilʾ, in Wired, February 26 2019. 
Poletti, D. (2023). ʿIl controllo dell’interessato e la strategia europea sui datiʾ in 
Osservatorio sulle fonti, 2:367-378.
Quarta, A. & G. Smorto (2020). Diritto privato dei mercati digitali. Florence: Le Monnier. 
Resta, G. (2023), ʿPubblico, privato, collettivo nel sistema europeo di governo dei datiʾ in 
G. Resta & V. Zeno Zencovich (eds.), Governance of /trough Big Data, II, Rome: 
RomaTre Press. 
Ricciuto, V. (2022). L’equivoco della privacy. Persona vs dato personale. Naples: 
Edizioni Scientifiche Italiane.
Rodotà, S. (1995). Tecnologie e diritti. Bologna: il Mulino. 
Roppo, V. (2010). ʿRegolazione del mercato e interessi di riferimento: dalla protezione del 
consumatore alla protezione del clienteʾ in Rivista di diritto privato 1:19-35. 
Stanzione, P. (2022). I poteri privati delle piattaforme e le nuove frontiere della privacy. 
Turin: Giappichelli. 
Szczepański, M. (2020). ʿIs data the new oil? Competition issues in the digital economyʾ, 
European Parliament Research Service: January 2020. 
Versaci, G. (2020). La contrattualizzazione dei dati personali dei consumatori. Naples: 
Edizioni Scientifiche Italiane. 
Zeno Zencovich, V. (2023). ʿDo “data markets” exist?ʾ, in G. Resta & V. Zeno Zencovich 
(eds.), Governance of /trough Big Data, I, Rome: RomaTre Press. 
62 
