
--- Page 1 ---
Making Sense of Private Advertising: A Principled
Approach to a Complex Ecosystem
Alishah Chator∗
Gabriel Kaptchuk∗
Kyle Hogan
Massachusetts Institute of Technology
klhogan@csail.mit.edu
Baruch College
alishah.chator@baruch.cuny.edu
University of Maryland
kaptchuk@umd.edu
Mayank Varia
Boston University
varia@bu.edu
Srinivas Devadas
Massachusetts Institute of Technology
devadas@mit.edu
Abstract
In this work, we model the end-to-end pipeline of the advertising
ecosystem, allowing us to identify two main issues with the current
trajectory of private advertising proposals. First, prior work has
largely considered ad targeting and engagement metrics individu-
ally rather than in composition. This has resulted in privacy notions
that, while reasonable for each protocol in isolation, fail to compose
to a natural notion of privacy for the ecosystem as a whole, permit-
ting advertisers to extract new information about the audience of
their advertisements. The second issue serves to explain the first:
we prove that perfect privacy is impossible for any, even minimally,
useful advertising ecosystem, due to the advertisers’ expectation of
conducting market research on the results.
Having demonstrated that leakage is inherent in advertising, we
re-examine what privacy could realistically mean in advertising,
building on the well-established notion of sensitive data in a specific
context. We identify that fundamentally new approaches are needed
when designing privacy-preserving advertising subsystems in order
to ensure that the privacy properties of the end-to-end advertising
system are well aligned with people’s privacy desires.
Keywords
advertising, privacy norms, universal composability, information
leakage, attribute privacy
1
Introduction
Behavioral advertising, in which people are preferentially shown
advertisements that align with their interests and demographics,
has become the financial backbone of the internet and the default
business model for large swaths of the technology sector. This
advertising ecosystem—and the user-tracking infrastructure that
powers it—are widely known to be privacy invasive [50], not only
due to the collection of sensitive, personal data, but also because of
the ways in which that data is used [17, 36, 95, 96].
A great deal of research has focused on the harms caused to peo-
ple through the use of their data for the targeting of advertisements.
Targeting algorithms are designed to maximize profit for the con-
stituents of the advertising industry, not to serve the best interests
of the viewer, and prior studies have shown that behavioral target-
ing is used to perpetuate harmful biases [3, 35, 54, 75, 88], facilitate
the spread of disinformation [15, 34, 53, 102], and exploit sensi-
tive information such as mental health data to target vulnerable
populations [6, 17, 24, 98].
While targeting has been the most widely-researched compo-
nent of behavioral advertising, matching ads to users is not the
only functionality of the ecosystem. Advertisers expect to conduct
market research using the relative success of their different adver-
tisements. To do so, they demand metrics on how users responded
to ads—did they buy something after viewing the ad? Subscribe to
the advertiser’s mailing list? If so, which ad drove this engagement?
Ad networks keep records of this information and submit it back to
advertisers, allowing them to improve their understanding about
the preferences of their consumers and refine future ad campaigns.
Targeted advertising is not unique to digital advertising: print
advertisements have long been targeting their ads towards specific
groups of people using both the context in which the ad will be
displayed (e.g., the magazine or billboard on which to advertise)
as well as cues within the ad material itself (e.g., visuals, audio,
etc.). A famous example is the 90’s Subaru campaign that was
targeted towards the LGBT community by including, e.g., queer-
coded license plates on the depicted cars [39, 65]. The shift to digital
advertising is, therefore, not a change in type, but a change in
magnitude and precision. Digital advertising, with its specific target
audiences and accurate attribution of user behavior to associated ad
views, allows advertisers to conduct market research that is far more
invasive than was possible with print media, calling into question
the ethics of campaigns that focus on sensitive audiences. This is
the case not only due to the well-understood harms of collecting
sensitive data for targeting ads [85], but also because it is currently
unclear what or how much information advertisers are able to learn
about these sensitive audiences from the metrics released on their
ad campaigns.
In response, researchers and technology companies have pro-
posed a shift towards “privacy-preserving advertising systems,” a
collection of proposals [8, 13, 42, 46, 48, 51, 52, 56, 73, 74, 83, 84,
90, 92, 100, 106, 107] that aim to maintain the existing advertising
business model while making the process of (1) targeting adver-
tisements and (2) reporting metrics on advertisement efficacy in a
privacy-preserving manner. Proponents of privacy-preserving ad-
vertising systems have made significant progress in refining the

--- Page 2 ---
1.1
Our Contributions
In this work, we provide a careful accounting of the structure un-
derpinning the advertising ecosystem. In doing so, we make the
following contributions:
– A clean, formal, and flexible abstraction of the end-to-end
advertising process. Our model, detailed in Section 4, makes
extensive use of parameterizing functions to ensure that our
abstraction is flexible enough to describe the behavior of the real-
world advertising pipeline as well as ongoing proposals to make
it more private. We choose Canetti’s Universally Composable
(UC) security framework [21] as the runtime for our modeling
in order to give structure to our analysis.
– A formal illustration of the inherent tension between pri-
vacy and utility. In Section 3, we highlight a gap between the
individual focus of current private advertising protocols and
the structure of advertising itself which considers audiences, or
groups of people. Leveraging our model, we concretize this gap
in Section 5 by providing lightweight minimum utility notions re-
quired of each component of an advertising ecosystem, which we
use to prove an inherent incompatibility with the group privacy
notion, attribute privacy [105]. Specifically, we prove that any
useful advertising ecosystem must necessarily leak some infor-
mation about its users—even when it employs strong, individual
privacy protections, such as differential privacy. We characterize
this leakage both theoretically and empirically in terms of the
difference in sample complexity [22]—the campaign size required
for a private advertising ecosystem to leak the same information
as its non-private counterpart.
– A refocus on normative privacy notations. Having shown
that some leakage is inherent in advertising, in Section 6 we
advocate for rooting future discussions of privacy in data sen-
sitivity as understood by end users, ad tech platforms, and reg-
ulatory bodies. Data sensitivity is well-studied when it comes
to private ad targeting, but is largely ignored by private metrics
protocols, which focus exclusively on the quantity of leakage.
We propose that by making metrics targeting-aware, protocols
could incorporate the idea of sensitivity and serve as a second
layer of enforcement–and accountability–for private advertising,
refocusing on what information is revealed about users.
2
Background on (Private) Advertising
2.1
The Advertising Ecosystem
The language used within the advertising literature can be difficult
to parse for the unfamiliar reader. As such, we provide a brief
overview of digital advertising, focusing on the creation of metrics
data (we direct the reader to other surveys for more detail [77]).
We illustrate the life cycle of an advertising campaign in Figure 1.
A campaign, or collection of ads directed at a target audience, begins
at step 0 when the advertiser registers it with the ad network. In
this case, the advertiser is using their campaign to conduct an A/B
test, a common practice that we discuss in depth in Section 3, by
registering two ads: one ad (A) depicting a family with children and
design of these systems, some of which have even been deployed
in popular browsers [42, 69, 100].
Unpacking “privacy” within advertising. In this work, we take
a step back to re-examine “privacy-preserving advertising systems”
from first principles. This choice is motivated by the desire to better
understand what is possible to achieve when adding privacy to
advertising when, largely, the concept feels like an oxymoron.
Ultimately, we find that this initial reaction is not far off: any
useful behavioral advertising ecosystem must necessarily permit
advertisers to extract information about end users, regardless of
what privacy protections are in place. Leveraging the language
of ideal functionalities, we give an implementation-independent
modeling of privacy-preserving advertising that focuses on the
minimal functionality required by the ecosystem.
Notably, our model departs from prior work in that it focuses
on the entire end-to-end advertising pipeline, with a particular em-
phasis on the ways that privacy-preserving targeting and privacy-
preserving metrics interact with one another and form a feedback
loop. By seeing privacy-preserving advertising in this way, we are
able to identify real-world advertising use cases in which common
notions of privacy for targeting and metrics fail to compose sat-
isfyingly, which undermines natural privacy guarantees for the
end-to-end system despite targeting and metrics protocols indepen-
dently achieving reasonable standards for privacy. We emphasize
that this composition failure is not merely the result of specific, ill-
designed protocols from early research; instead, it is fundamental
to the nature of targeted advertising itself.
Looking further: we also examine how to consider privacy for-
mally in the context of advertising. While perfect privacy may not be
possible for advertising, we observe that it is also not necessarily re-
quired or even desirable. For instance, while contextual advertising
(where ads are targeted only to the context in which they will be dis-
played, i.e., the website or article) can suffer from the same problems
as behavioral advertising in the worst case, it is still strongly pre-
ferred as an alternative to behavioral advertising. While the privacy
provided by contextual advertising may be imperfect, it is likely
“good enough” [63, 99]. Hence, using the language of information
leakage alone makes it difficult to distinguish between advertising
systems that are widely considered “invasive” and those that are
not. We additionally observe that a narrow focus on building mech-
anisms to regulate—without eliminating—information leakage, like
differential privacy [37], risk treating all types of information leak-
age identically and missing the ways in which people feel differently
about some sensitive information categories. As a result, we adopt
the framework of attribute privacy [105] to evaluate privacy in the
context of advertising.
Relatedly, not all advertising campaigns have the same poten-
tial for privacy harm, even if they do leak the same amount of
information. For this reason, we also employ the framework of
contextual integrity [71] to reason about the sensitivity of the data
involved. This sentiment is captured, if not well-enforced, by cur-
rent tech policy and legal regulations for ad targeting, but absent
from consideration in private metrics. This motivates a more holis-
tic approach toward the design of privacy-preserving advertising
systems that reason carefully about the amount of information
revealed by metrics and the sensitivity of that leakage.

--- Page 3 ---
Figure 1: An illustration of the advertising ecosystem, depicting the process of generating metrics on a behavioral advertising
campaign. See Section 2.1 for details.
another ad (B) without children. In both cases the ads are directed
at an audience of “busy people looking for a convenient meal”.
Later, 1 when a user browses to a publisher website displaying
ads, that website will send a request 2 to the ad network containing
data on the site itself as well as an identifier for the user. The ad
network then runs a targeting model and a real-time bidding auction
Adveil [83] presents a protocol for the full advertising pipeline,
and it considers the fact that metrics reports can be revealing of per-
sonal data even if they are not directly linkable to an individual user.
Themis [74] is an early industry proposal that uses a consortium
blockchain to provide transparency and accountability for metrics
data. It, again, provides unlinkability between users and their re-
ports, but it does not have further privacy protections for metrics
data. CookieMonster [90] is a recent work out of the W3C Pri-
vate Advertising Technology Community Group (PATCG), which is
working to standardize a private metrics protocol. CookieMonster
provides a full model and security analysis for differentially-private
ad metrics with emphasis on handling complexities in privacy loss
budgets. It grew out of earlier work on Interoperable Private At-
tribution (IPA) [73] and is part of the work on Privacy Preserving
Attribution (PPA) [47]. Apple’s Private Attribution Measurement
(PAM) [100] and Google’s Attribution Reporting API (ARA) [42]
are both alternative, differential-privacy-based proposals—though
PAM was recently superseded by PPA.
To the best of our knowledge, ours is the first work to formally
model and prove the presence of leakage for all advertising systems,
rather than the absence of leakage for a specific system.
3
Defining Privacy for Advertising
3 , incorporating data from the advertiser, in order to select which
ad to deliver to the user 4 . The user views the ad 5 and may, at
some point in the future 6 subscribe to a meal kit service (likely
on a different site) as a result of seeing this ad.
Engagement with an advertiser, such as making a purchase or
even adding items to a cart, is known as a conversion. The ad net-
work attributes 7 the user’s conversion to the impression, or ad
view, it believes was responsible. In this case, that was the most
recent impression, ignoring ads from unrelated campaigns. This
process is known as attribution, and attributing a conversion to the
most recent impression is a strategy called “last touch.”
Eventually, the ad network collects attribution data 8 from all
users who viewed ads in this campaign and uses it to compute
metrics 9 that the advertiser can use to determine which ad from
the campaign was more successful in driving purchases.
In more detail, these metrics largely correspond to a count of
how many conversions were attributed to each ad, and they are
what allow the advertiser to run its A/B test and refine their strat-
egy for future campaigns to focus more effort on ad content that
drove higher engagement [14, 55]. For this example, ad A outper-
formed ad B, so the advertiser will likely focus future advertising
spend towards parents. We go into more detail on the leakage from
advertising metrics and its potential for harm in Section 3.
2.2
Related Work
While there is a rich history of academic research on privatizing
advertising [8, 13, 46, 48, 51, 52, 56, 62, 74, 83, 84, 90, 92, 106, 107],
the majority of this work has not considered the potential impact
of releasing metrics data (beyond the possibility of linking an in-
dividual conversion report to the specific user who generated it).
Exceptions to this include AdVeil [83], Themis [74], CookieMonster
[90], and various industry proposals for privatizing metrics (Apple’s
PCM/PAM [5, 100], Google’s ARA [42], Meta/Mozilla’s IPA [73],
and a W3C standardization effort PPA [47]) that we discuss next.
Privacy is a multifaceted [86] and contextually embedded [70] con-
cept that does not permit a unified definition, so we first concretize
what we mean by privacy within advertising. We begin with a
leakage-based notion; ideally, advertising systems that aim to pre-
serve privacy should prevent any information from leaking about
users. Emerging proposals for private advertising are rapidly mov-
ing towards this “no-leakage” world by pushing more of the tar-
geting logic to clients’ own devices (e.g., FLEDGE [78]). Such a
shift is a step in the right direction—away from the mass surveil-
lance [16, 29, 82, 94, 103] that currently supplies personal data for
ad targeting. However, delivering relevant ads is only one step in
the advertising pipeline.
Advertisers also want metrics on how these ads perform. Ads
can be expensive, and performance metrics allow advertisers to
direct their spending to campaigns that drive a better return on ad
spend (ROAS) [77]. Yet, even very basic metrics, such as which ads
were delivered, violate our zero-leakage goals as, due to the nature

--- Page 4 ---
of targeting, the ads themselves are revealing of their audience
[25, 66]. Recognizing that metrics leakage could cause significant
harm, there has been a widespread effort [47, 90] to make the met-
rics computed on advertisement performance differentially private,
limiting the amount of information contained about individuals.
However, as we demonstrate in this work, advertising requires
more than individual privacy in order to adequately protect the
information that users consider to be important.
We use this section to introduce metrics as a critical component
of the advertising ecosystem, outline why it renders perfect privacy
impossible for advertising, and argue that seemingly-natural fixes—
such as differentially-private metrics—fail to adequately mitigate
the privacy harms that can arise from advertising ecosystems.
3.1
Market Research as Information Leakage
if many of the audience members are parents, then ad A will be
shown more frequently.
Market research is an iterative process. Consider our earlier
campaign example of marketing ready-made meal kits: the first
iteration could test whether the audience of “busy people who don’t
cook” also tends to have the “new parent” feature. Supposing that
this turns out to be the case, the advertiser can then test whether
“busy new parents who don’t cook” tend to prefer “health-focused”
meals and so forth. Thus, this practice does not only reveal a “little
bit more” information about audiences, but can be used (over time)
to extract tremendous amounts of information about audiences.
Much market research is, like this example, relatively innocuous.
However, this same infrastructure can be (and is) used to learn
about arbitrary topics. We see examples of this with researchers
leveraging these platforms to carry out their own research studies
[81]—studies that are suspiciously close to “human subject research”
that is generally expected to be under the close supervision of
institutional review boards. For instance, consider the study by
Chan et al. that uses advertising to assess whether conservatives
are likely to have stronger brand attachment [26]. Another study
used advertising to assess public perceptions of refugees, though it
did acknowledge the ethical considerations of the research [1].
The upshot is that market research—an inherently desired compo-
nent within any advertising system—enables a level of data-mining
that goes far beyond improving the quality of advertising. How-
ever, the existing discussion of privacy in advertising is centered
on individual privacy, whereas the leakage we describe here is a
group privacy harm.
The insights that advertisers derive from metrics go far beyond
simple counts of how often advertisements are shown, and they
are used to conduct market research on how users engage with the
ads they are shown. By collecting metrics on the relative successes
of their current advertising campaigns, advertisers can refine the
content and target audience of future campaigns to focus their ad
spending on serving appealing content to the people who are most
likely to engage with it [41].
The most clear example of this type of market research is the A/B
test, a practice where advertisers can create two versions of an ad
and test which is preferred by their target audience or, conversely,
test which of two possible target audiences gets better results for
a given ad campaign. A/B tests are so commonplace that major
advertising platforms have built-in tools for advertisers to set up
their experiments.
3.2
Distributional Privacy for Advertising
To illustrate how such tests are conducted, we revisit Figure 1
and consider an instant meal-kit company that wants to decide
whether to focus its ad spend toward parents with young children.
Such a company could set up its campaign in two main ways, testing
on the target audience or on the ad content:
(1) Create two different ads, both depicting someone in a rush using
the meal-kit to prepare a quick meal, but ad features a toddler
and ad does not.
(2) Show the generic meal-kit ad (i.e., one without any particular
features that suggest its relevance to parents) to two different
audiences, audience A being, e.g., “busy parents looking for a
convenient meal option” while audience B removes the parent
feature, e.g., “people looking for a convenient meal option.”
No matter which A/B testing approach is leveraged, the result
is fundamentally the same: advertisers learn whether members of
their audience are more likely to be parents with young children
based on the relative performance of A and B. In case (1), this
follows from one of the core axioms of advertising: people are more
likely to engage with ads that are more relevant to them [57, 64].
By contrast, in case (2) the targeting algorithm will preferentially
show the ad it believes to be more relevant to the audience, i.e.,
At first glance, this may seem like a natural place to utilize dif-
ferential privacy (DP) [37], and indeed most proposals for private
advertising metrics systems use DP. However, simply privatizing
the aggregated metrics in this way is insufficient. Market research
involves inference over a target audience or group of people, not
an individual user, and DP is intentionally designed to enable this
type of inference [38].
Unlike a typical research study, the selection process for adver-
tising audiences is designed to ensure that their members are not
representative of the general population [28, 59]. Instead, audiences
will often overwhelmingly represent small, arcane minority groups
whose members may not even realize that such a grouping exists
[67]: examples of audience profiles include “receptive to emotional
messaging,” “rollercoaster romantics,” “heavy buyers of pregnancy
tests,” and “strugglers and strivers – credit reliant” [6].
Many of these audiences represent vulnerable populations and
allowing advertisers to extract arbitrary information about them
can be harmful even when it doesn’t permit linking this informa-
tion to individuals. Manipulative advertising practices use these
inferences to tailor their messaging to the viewer, increasing its
effectiveness [11, 89, 104]. A common example of this practice is in
political advertising where ads are typically microtargeted to spe-
cific populations with the intent to influence their vote [60, 79, 108].
An additional challenge is that DP doesn’t provide protection
against an advertiser applying the group-level inferences made over
the audience to its individual members [81]. A common example

--- Page 5 ---
for DP is that learning the group trend that “smoking causes cancer”
would also imply that any specific smoker is at risk of cancer. But
advertising takes this a step further due to “custom audiences”
that can be composed of specific, identifiable individuals such as
those on the advertiser’s mailing list. For these audiences, a better
analogy might be revealing that members of a specific sci-fi book
club have an unusually high rate of cancer. Unlike in the case of
smoking, this is not a global inference implying that sci-fi books
cause cancer, but is instead reflective of the health status of these
specific people. Revealing this type of inference—even with DP
guarantees—is likely counter to peoples’ expectation of privacy,
especially given the information asymmetry in advertising where
inferences are revealed to the advertisers, but not their audience.
For this reason, we instead employ attribute privacy [105] to cap-
ture the potential privacy harms from advertising market research.
Figure 2: UC functionalities for advertising ecosystem.
3.3
Attribute Privacy in the Advertising Context
For advertising metrics, we can think of 𝑔 () as computing the
fraction of the audience who possess the sensitive attribute.
• Θ is the set of possible distributions that could have generated
the audience shown in 𝑋. Each 𝜃 is intended to capture possible
correlations across attributes.
Formally, the sensitivity of an output statistic 𝐹 (𝑋) over the
dataset 𝑋 is computed as follows:
Attribute privacy, proposed by Zhang et al. [105], describes the
ability of an adversary to learn information about specific, sensi-
tive attributes of a population given summary statistics about that
population. It defines sensitivity around the maximum contribution
that the distribution of some sensitive feature in a population may
have on the output of statistics computed over that population.
In this section, we provide the formal definition of attribute
privacy, which is built on the pufferfish privacy framework [58].
E[𝐹 (𝑋)|𝑠
,𝜃] − E[𝐹 (𝑋)|𝑠
,𝜃]
.
(1)
Δ 𝐹 = max
max
Later, in Section 6, we provide some guidance on how attribute
privacy could be integrated into the advertising ecosystem as a
potential enforcement mechanism for user-focused privacy policies.
Definition 3.1 (Dataset Attribute Privacy, Definition 3 from Zhang
et al. [105]). Let (𝑋
,𝑋
, . . . ,𝑋
) be a record with 𝑚 attributes
that is sampled from an unknown distribution D, and let 𝑋 =
[𝑋 , . . . ,𝑋 ] be a dataset of 𝑛 records sampled i.i.d. from D where
𝑋 denotes the (column) vector containing values of the 𝑖th attribute
of every record. Let 𝐶 ⊆[𝑚] be the set of indices of sensitive
attributes, and for each𝑖 ∈ 𝐶, let𝑔 (𝑋 ) be a function with codomain
U .
A mechanism M satisfies (𝜖,𝛿)-dataset attribute privacy if it is
(𝜖,𝛿)-Pufferfish private for the following framework (𝑆, Q, Θ):
Set of secrets: 𝑆 = {𝑠
:= 1[𝑔 (𝑋 ) ∈U
] : U
⊆U ,𝑖 ∈ 𝐶}.
Set of secret pairs: Q = {(𝑠
,𝑠
) ∈ 𝑆 × 𝑆,𝑖 ∈ 𝐶}.
Distribution: Θ is a set of possible distributions 𝜃 over the dataset
𝑋. For each possible distribution D over records, there ex-
ists a 𝜃 ∈ Θ that corresponds to the distribution over 𝑛
i.i.d. samples from D.
For advertising, we consider 𝐹 (𝑋) to be the metrics for an advertis-
ing campaign (e.g., a count of ad clicks, conversions, or purchases).
Sensitivity captures the maximum impact on 𝐹 (𝑋), which occurs
for the pair of potential secrets (𝑠
,𝑠
) in which all or none of the
audience (respectively) have the sensitive attribute and for the 𝜃
with the tightest correlation between this attribute and the conver-
sion rate. In words: if possessing the sensitive attribute makes a
user significantly more (or less) likely to engage with an ad, then
varying the prevalence of this feature within the audience will have
a strong impact on reported number of conversions. For instance, in
our example A/B test from the previous section with an audience of
“busy people who don’t cook,” a toddler-focused ad is much more
strongly correlated with the sensitive attribute (parental status)
than an ad focused on the types of food contained in the meal kit.
We demonstrate later in Section 5 that a lack of attribute privacy
is inherent to advertising; i.e., any minimally useful ads ecosystem
will reveal some new information about its audiences. However, cur-
rent instantiations and associated privacy definitions give very little
control over what information leaks. In Section 6, we discuss the
concept of sensitivity in depth and argue that advertising requires
more than individual privacy in order to meet users’ expectations.
4
Modeling the Advertising Ecosystem
To contextualize this definition in the advertising setting, con-
sider the dataset 𝑋 to be an advertising audience with 𝑛 members,
each represented by a feature vector (𝑋
,𝑋
, . . . ,𝑋
) of length 𝑚
indicating the attributes of the 𝑗 user. Some attributes will be
considered sensitive and represented in 𝐶 ⊆[𝑚]. Then:
• The secret pairs (𝑠
,𝑠
) for a sensitive attribute 𝑖 are possible
realizations of some function 𝑔 (𝑋 ) over that sensitive attribute.
In this section, we present our minimalist modeling of the advertis-
ing ecosystem. Our modeling captures the minimum information
leakage present in the advertising ecosystem, and it represents
an ecosystem that has been designed to eliminate all unintended
information flows back to advertisers. We perform this modeling
from the perspective of advertiser by having the advertiser set
target audiences and receive summary reports on ad display and

--- Page 6 ---
of the academic proposals for private ad targeting and auctions
[106, 107].
Ideal Functionality F
F is parameterized with a number of individuals 𝑛 and
a distribution over the user feature space D.
Initialize: Upon receiving an init message from F
for 𝑈𝑠𝑒𝑟 :
The Browsing Function 𝑓 and Engagement Function 𝑓 . We
make use of two (randomized) parameterizing functions, 𝑓 and
𝑓 in order to capture human behavior in our model. Specifically,
𝑓 decides which website a user 𝑈𝑠𝑒𝑟 will visit, and 𝑓 decides
how a user 𝑈𝑠𝑒𝑟 will interact when presented with a particular
advertisement (e.g., will they generate a “conversion,” by purchasing
the advertised product). These are best thought of as “black boxes”
that need not be opened in order to understand the end-to-end
functioning of the system.
(1) if 𝑈𝑠𝑒𝑟 does not already have recorded features, sam-
ple features for 𝑈𝑠𝑒𝑟 from D and record.
(2) Send an init message to F with 𝑈𝑠𝑒𝑟 and its
recorded features.
Figure 3: F
, our way of modeling the features provided
to people in society.
The Attribution Function 𝑓 . Within the advertising ecosystem,
each conversion event must be attributed to an advertisement im-
pression (see Section 2). The attribution function 𝑓 performs the
logic of this attribution. For example, a common attribution func-
tion is “last-touch attribution,” where the most recent impression
prior to a conversion receives all the “credit” for the conversion. In
the name of generality, the parameterizing attribution function 𝑓
takes in a set of impressions (along with the context in which the im-
pression occurred) and allocates scores to each of these impressions
according to arbitrary logic. In practice, 𝑓 could be instantiated by
the Privacy Preserving Attribution protocol [47].
engagement. While other actors in the advertising ecosystem (e.g.,
publisher websites and ad networks) certainly have their own func-
tionality goals, advertisers are the driving force behind the feedback
loop on user data through the advertising ecosystem. In Section 5
we will use this model to “prove insecurity,” i.e., show that useful ad-
vertising ecosystems will necessarily leak information about their
users. Thus, if some future system provably instantiates our ideal
functionalities, that should not be misconstrued as a demonstration
that it is privacy-preserving in a normative sense. Instead, such a
system would have at least the leakage we demonstrate here, and
may have substantially more.
4.1
Parameterizing Functions
The Reporting Function 𝑓 . Advertisers learn about the perfor-
mance of various advertisements within a campaign by generating
a report. The exact nature of how this report is compiled from
the attribution scores is system specific, but we encourage readers
who want a concrete example to think about the report as simply a
histogram of advertisement performance (i.e., a measure of how ef-
ficiently advertisement impressions became conversions). In many
of the emerging private advertising system proposals [5, 42, 47, 73],
report generation is done with differential privacy. We capture
this process generically with the 𝑓 parameterizing function, which
could be instantiated by any of these proposals or by some future
protocol with an alternative privacy mechanism.
4.2
Ideal Advertising Functionalities
Before providing an overview of our model, we first introduce
definitions for an ad and an audience (we represent the latter using
feature vectors in this work).
Our model makes heavy use of parameterizing functions when
specifying ideal functionalities. These parameterizing functions
mean that our model is flexible enough to capture a wide variety
of potential advertising systems, including those that attempt to
preserve privacy, those that are widely understood to be privacy
invasive, or even systems that would make little sense to deploy
in practice. We note that it might be best to think of some of these
functions as being stateful (e.g., if a privacy budget must be managed
over many queries); for simplicity, we do not explicitly manage
state for these functions, but observe that it is trivial to modify
our modeling to make them stateful. We briefly introduce these
parameterizing functions before presenting our formal model.
Definition 4.1 (Ad). An advertisement ad = {𝑥 , ...,𝑥 },𝑥 ∈{0, 1}
is a binary vector of length ℓ. Each index in the vector represents a
particular (implicit) quality the media for that advertisement could
encode. When a particular index is 1, that means the feature is
present in the media. Importantly, we use this formalism to describe
a piece of media directly, rather than allowing an advertiser to
present media and then choose a binary vector associated with that
media; in this way, we assume that it is impossible for an advertiser
to lie about the features of an ad.
The Targeting Filter 𝜌 and Targeting Function 𝑓 . We model the
decision to select which ad for a user𝑢𝑠𝑒𝑟 when they visit a website
as a two phase process: (1) from the set of𝑢𝑠𝑒𝑟 ’s features, a subset
features’ is extracted using a (deterministic) filter function 𝜌 and
is then (2) fed into an arbitrary (randomized) selection function 𝑓 ,
the output of which is an advertisement. The filter function 𝜌 can
be thought of as a policy that limits the type of information that the
targeting logic 𝑓 is allowed to access. Real-world instantiations of
𝜌 could model: (1) intentional restrictions such as Google’s Topics
API [43] and (2) unintentional inaccuracies in targeting profiles.
Then, 𝑓 could embed any “secret sauce” used by the advertising
network to select the most effective advertisement to match to a
user, including an opaque machine learning model or even one
Definition 4.2 (Audience). An audience = {𝑥 , ...,𝑥 },𝑥 ∈{0, 1}
is also a binary vector of length ℓ. Each index in this vector encodes
an attribute that members of the audiences should have. We assume
that the meanings of indices for advertisements and audiences are
consistent with one another—that is, the𝑖 element of each encodes
the same feature.

--- Page 7 ---
Ideal Functionality F
F has a set of users {𝑈𝑠𝑒𝑟 ,𝑈𝑠𝑒𝑟 , ...,𝑈𝑠𝑒𝑟 } each with a set of features (specified by F
) and a browsing-history. Additionally,
for each 𝑈𝑠𝑒𝑟 , F also maintains three indices into their browsing-history: targeting , engagement , and attribution .
Browsing: Upon receiving a browsing message from F
for 𝑈𝑠𝑒𝑟 :
(1) If 𝑈𝑠𝑒𝑟 has no features, send an init message to F
and record the response. Set targeting , engagement , and attribution to 0.
(2) Send 𝑈𝑠𝑒𝑟 ’s identity, features, and full browsing-history to F
.
(3) Upon receiving a response from F
with site, append site to the browsing-history for 𝑈𝑠𝑒𝑟 . Then, send ok message to
F
.
Ad Targeting: Upon receiving a target message from F
for 𝑈𝑠𝑒𝑟 :
(1) If targeting = null (i.e., browsing has not been called for this user) respond fail to F
.
(2) Send 𝑈𝑠𝑒𝑟 ’s identity, features, and browsing-history[0 : targeting ] to F
.
(3) Upon receiving a response from F
for 𝑈𝑠𝑒𝑟 of the form (site, ad), if browsing-history[targeting ] contains an matching entry
site, then overwrite the entry with (site, ad) and increment targeting . Then, send ok to F
.
Ad engagement: Upon receiving an engagement message from F
for 𝑈𝑠𝑒𝑟 :
(1) If engagement = targeting (i.e., engagement decisions were made for all impressions), respond fail to F
.
(2) Respond to F
with 𝑈𝑠𝑒𝑟 ’s features and the tuple browsing-history[engagement ] = (site, ad).
(3) Upon receiving a response from F
with ad and conversion for 𝑈𝑠𝑒𝑟 , overwrite browsing-history[engagement ] to be
(site, ad, conversion) and increment engagement . Then, send ok message to F
.
Attribution: Upon receiving a attribute message from F
for 𝑈𝑠𝑒𝑟 :
(1) Let 𝑗 = attribution . Starting with 𝑗, find the first entry of browsing-history with a tuple (site, ad, conversion) such that conversion
is non-None. Set attribution to be the index of this entry. If no such index exists, respond fail to F
instead.
(2) Send an attribution message to F for 𝑈𝑠𝑒𝑟 with browsing-history[𝑗 : attribution ].
Figure 4: F holds data about each user and is responsible to shuttling information between F , F , and
F . Handles user features along with all data related to ad impressions and conversions.
Model overview. We give a high-level depiction of our model in
Figure 2. Namely, our model consists of five main ideal function-
alities: F
, F , F
, F
, and F
. In
Model flow details. Next, we illustrate how these functionalities
work and provide a detailed description of the way data flows
through the system. We note that some of our functionalities also
allow for interactions to occur in a different order.
(1) Populating user features: The features associated with
each user are set up on demand. Specifically, F
is set up with
a total number of individuals 𝑛 that it will create and a distribu-
tion from which each individual’s features will be sampled. The
environment does not need to explicitly initiate this sampling pro-
cess, as F
will perform this “just in time” whenever F
encounters a user with no recorded features.
Figure 3, F
is responsible for sampling the features for each
of the 𝑛 users in the system from some distribution D. Importantly,
this means that the exact features for each user is hidden from the
environment—although the distribution D may be known to the
environment. In Figure 4, F is a subroutine that serves as
the shared data infrastructure of the entire system, including hold-
ing each user’s features and information about their interactions
with the advertising system. We note that F might be im-
plemented in a distributed manner, such that different elements of
the data may be held by different real-world computational parties.
In Figures 5 to 7, F
, F
, and F
make up the
core of the advertising ecosystem. Concretely, F
is respon-
sible for choosing advertisements to deliver to users, F
is responsible for determining the websites that a user visits and
how a user will interact with advertisements on those websites,
and F
is responsible for attributing conversion events and
reporting on the performance of advertisements.
(2) Registering Ad Campaigns: When an advertiser wants to
send an advertisement, they begin by sending a Register Cam-
paign message to F
(Figure 5) that specifies the explicit
target audience to which they want to advertisements to be shown
as well as the features of the advertisements {ad , . . . , ad } in the
campaign (e.g., embedded within the visual media). We emphasize
that the modeling is done such that the advertiser cannot “lie” about
the semantic content of the advertisement—the feature vector is
the advertisement.

--- Page 8 ---
Ideal Functionality F
Ideal Functionality F
F is parameterized by 𝑓 that selects a site for a user
to visit and 𝑓 that determines how a user will interact with
an advertisement.
Browsing: Upon receiving an browsing message for 𝑈𝑠𝑒𝑟
from 𝐸𝑛𝑣:
F is parameterized by a stateful, randomized func-
tion 𝑓 and a filtering function 𝜌. It also maintains a set
active-campaigns.
Register Campaign: Upon receiving a campaign
:
(audience, {ad , . . . , ad }) message from the 𝐸𝑛𝑣:
(1) Add campaign to active-campaigns.
(2) Send an ok message to the 𝐸𝑛𝑣.
Target Ad: Upon receiving an ad message from 𝐸𝑛𝑣 for𝑈𝑠𝑒𝑟 :
(1) Send a browsing message to F for 𝑈𝑠𝑒𝑟 .
(2) Upon receiving a response from F for 𝑈𝑠𝑒𝑟
with features, and full browsing-history, generate
site ← 𝑓 (features, browsing-history).
(3) Send 𝑠𝑖𝑡𝑒 to F for 𝑈𝑠𝑒𝑟 .
(4) Upon receiving ok from F , send ok message
to 𝐸𝑛𝑣.
Ad Engagement: Upon receiving an engagement message
for 𝑈𝑠𝑒𝑟 from 𝐸𝑛𝑣:
(1) Send a target message to F for 𝑈𝑠𝑒𝑟 .
(2) Upon receiving a response from F with
features and browsing-history for 𝑈𝑠𝑒𝑟 :
(a) run features’ ← 𝜌(𝑈𝑠𝑒𝑟 , features) to obtain
features’ ⊆ features
(b) Extract
site
from
the
final
element
of
browsing-history.
(3) Compute ad ← 𝑓 (active-campaigns, features’,
site).
(4) Send F a message with the identifier𝑈𝑠𝑒𝑟 and
a tuple of the form (site, ad).
(5) Upon receiving ok or fail from F , send ok to
the 𝐸𝑛𝑣.
(1) Send an engagement message to F for 𝑈𝑠𝑒𝑟 .
(2) Upon receiving a response from F with
𝑈𝑠𝑒𝑟 ’s features and a tuple (site, ad), generate
conversion ←
𝑓 (features, site, ad). Note that
conversion may be None.
(3) Respond to F with𝑈𝑠𝑒𝑟 , ad, and conversion.
(4) Upon receiving ok or fail from F , send ok
message to 𝐸𝑛𝑣.
Figure 5: Targeting functionality F
Figure 6: Engagement functionality F
parameterizing function 𝑓 , determines if the user turns generates
a conversion on that impression. Note that the input to 𝑓 is the
features associated with the advertising media ad (as the user ac-
tually sees the media, not the target audience). The results of this
determination are then stored back in F .
(3) Initiating browsing: The environment prompts the user to
browse a website by calling the Browsing interface of F
.
Note that the environment does not know the specific features
of any given user, so we don’t have the environment specify the
website directly. Rather, we use 𝑓 to choose the website that the user
visits, possibly based on the user’s features. Specifically, F
requests𝑈𝑠𝑒𝑟 ’s features from F and obtains the site using
𝑓 , which is defined over the features of the user and their previous
browsing history. Then, F
informs F that 𝑈𝑠𝑒𝑟
has visited site.
(6) Attribution: Before any metrics information can be pro-
vided, F
must first attribute each conversion event to at least
one impression. The environment prompts this through the At-
tribute interface of F
. When invoked in this way, F
calls to F and retrieves the user’s conversion history. Then,
F
updates the “scores” of each ad based on the output 𝑓 . It
is easiest to think of this step as attributing the full “credit” for the
conversion to the last impression.
(4) Advertisement Targeting and Delivery: To model the
delivery of an advertisement to a user that has been prompted to
visit a website, the environment uses the Target Ad interface of
F
. This triggers a target message to F in order to
obtain the necessary information about the user and the context
(i.e., site) in which the ad will be displayed. Next, F
uses
𝜌 and 𝑓 to select the ad that will be shown to the user. Note that
the input to 𝑓 should operate over the the audience associated
with the advertisements. The chosen advertisement is then sent to
F to be stored.
(7) Report Creation: Finally, the environment (as the adver-
tiser) requests a report on the performance of its campaign. To
do this, the environment invokes the Generate Report interface
of F
, specifying a campaign (i.e., a set of advertisements).
These are then transformed into a report by the 𝑓 function, which
is also responsible for adding noise or any other privacy protection
mechanism.
(5) User Engagement: After the user has viewed the adver-
tisement (i.e., F holds a tuple containing a site and an
ad), the environment triggers possible user engagement using the
Ad engagement interface of F
. In response, F
retrieves the necessary information from F and, using the

--- Page 9 ---
Ideal Functionality F
Targeting. We begin with our utility function for targeting. Specif-
ically, a useful targeting system should be one that delivers ads that
are more relevant to people with higher probability. We formalize
this notion by saying that the probability that an one advertisement
is chosen over another is proportional to the difference in 𝑐𝑙𝑜𝑠𝑒
between the targeting audience and the user’s features.
F is parameterized by an attribution function 𝑓 and re-
port generation function 𝑓 . Additionally, F maintains
an updatable map ad-scores.
Attribute: Upon receiving an attribute message from 𝐸𝑛𝑣
for 𝑈𝑠𝑒𝑟 :
Definition 5.1 (Targeting Utility). A targeting function 𝑓 is 𝛼-
useful with respect to a distance measurement 𝑐𝑙𝑜𝑠𝑒 and filter func-
tion 𝜌 if, given inputs active-campaigns, features, and site, for
all (audience , ad ), (audience , ad ) ∈ active-ads, if
𝑐𝑙𝑜𝑠𝑒(audience , features)−
𝑐𝑙𝑜𝑠𝑒(audience , features) = Δ, then,
Pr [ad ← 𝑓 (active-campaigns, 𝜌(features), site)] −
Pr [ad ← 𝑓 (active-campaigns, 𝜌(features), site)] ≥ 𝛼 ·Δ.
(1) Send a attribute message to F for 𝑈𝑠𝑒𝑟 .
(2) Upon
receiving
a
response
from
F
for
𝑈𝑠𝑒𝑟
with
list
browsing-history,
run
[(ad , score ), (ad , score ), ...]
←
𝑓 (browsing-history).
(3) For each ad in the output, add score to the entry for
ad in ad-scores.
(4) Send an ok message to 𝐸𝑛𝑣.
Generate Report: Upon receiving a Report message from
𝐸𝑛𝑣 for a campaign : (audience, {ad , . . . , ad }),
Engagement. A foundational assumption of advertising is that
individuals are more likely to engage with advertisements that are
more “like them.” We formalize this idea using a closeness metric,
similar to the one in Definition 5.1 for targeting utility.
(1) Let ad-scores| be a map that is a subset of
ad-scores such that
ad-scores| =
{(ad , score ) ∈ ad-scores | ad ∈{ad , . . . , ad }} .
Definition 5.2 (Engagement Utility). We say that an engagement
function 𝑓 is 𝛼-useful with respect to a distance measurement 𝑐𝑙𝑜𝑠𝑒
if for any set of user features features, website site, pair of adver-
tisements (ad , ad ), and non-None conversion event conversion:
(2) Generate report ← 𝑓 (ad-scores| ).
(3) Respond to 𝐸𝑛𝑣 with a message containing report.
if 𝑐𝑙𝑜𝑠𝑒(ad , features) − 𝑐𝑙𝑜𝑠𝑒(ad , features) = Δ,
then Pr [conversion ← 𝑓 (features, site, ad )]
− Pr [conversion ← 𝑓 (features, site, ad )] ≥ 𝛼 · Δ.
Figure 7: Metrics functionality F
5
Inherent Tension Between Privacy and
Usefulness
Attribution. Attribution is considered useful if it is more likely to
attribute a conversion to the impression that generated it than an
unrelated impression. For the purposes of our analysis, we model
utility of F
relative to the ground truth as generated by
F
. One of the limitations of our model is that F
does not model cases where many impressions contribute to a single
conversion event. So, while our attribution functionality is generic
and can handle multi-touch attribution, the ground truth for this
analysis is that a single ad is responsible for each conversion.
Now that we have introduced our abstract modeling of the adver-
tising ecosystem, in this section we formalize two key concepts: (i)
what does it mean for this ecosystem to be “useful” (what is the
minimal functionality we need from our parameterizing functions)
and (ii) what does it mean to add privacy to this ecosystem. We use
this formalism to show, analytically and empirically, that privacy
and utility are inherently in tension.
5.1
Defining Utility
Definition 5.3 (Attribution Utility). An attribution function 𝑓
is 𝛼-useful with respect to an engagement function 𝑓 if for any
feature vector features, any pair of advertisements (ad , ad ) and
associated websites site, and any non-None conversion event
conversion:
if Pr [conversion ← 𝑓 (features, site, ad )] −
active-ads. In order to make the notation more direct, we define
a set active-ads that represents the set of advertisements from
which targeting may choose. Specifically, for any active-campaigns,
let active-ads be defined as follows:
Pr [conversion ← 𝑓 (features, site, ad )] = Δ,
active-ads = {(audience, ad) |
then Pr [𝑠𝑐𝑜𝑟𝑒𝑠[ad ] > 𝑠𝑐𝑜𝑟𝑒𝑠[ad ] |
{audience, ad-set} ∈ active-campaigns, ad ∈ ad-set}.
𝑠𝑐𝑜𝑟𝑒𝑠 ← 𝑓 (conversion, browsing-history)] ≥ 𝛼 · Δ
if browsing-history contains both ad and ad .
Metrics. Metrics is considered useful if it permits statistical tests
to be conducted on the results. That is, if some test, such as an
Measuring closeness. We also require a concept of relevancy to
capture the idea that behavioral advertising is intended to show
users ads that are relevant, or closely matched, to their interests and
demographics. We represent this with a 𝑐𝑙𝑜𝑠𝑒 metric that takes as
input two (binary) feature vectors and outputs a score that increases
as the distance between the inputs shrinks.

--- Page 10 ---
where (D ,𝑎𝑢𝑥) ←A (1 , D ) and𝑏
←−{0, 1}, and the probability
is taken over the random choices of A, 𝑏, and the execution. We
define the adversary’s advantage Adv
:= 𝑝.
A/B test, could be conducted on the raw attribution data, it should
still be possible to conduct this test on the aggregated and possibly
noisy version of this data output by metrics. That is, the utility of
metrics is defined based on what the advertiser intended to do with
the attribution data.
Definition 5.4 (Metrics Utility Preserving). For all ℎ, we say that a
randomized metrics report generation function 𝑓 : D →D is 𝛼-
utility-preserving with respect to a (possibly randomized) processing
function 𝑓 : D →{0, 1} if for all ˆ 𝑑 = {𝑑 , ...,𝑑 } ∈D ,
|Pr[𝑓 ( ˆ 𝑑) = 1] − Pr[𝑓 ({𝑓 ( ˆ 𝑑)}) = 1]| < 𝛼,
where the probabilities are over the randomness of 𝑓 and 𝑓 .
5.2
Formal Statement
In this section, we state and prove our formal result: there is an
innate tension between preventing leakage and preserving utility
in an advertising ecosystem.
In this definition, D should be thought of as the ground truth
distribution of features across people in society, whereas D repre-
sents the advertiser’s prior knowledge about how people’s features
are distributed. Hence, the distance between these distributions cor-
responds to the precision of information gained by distinguishing.
When D is close to D , distinguishing will be more challenging,
but the advertiser can learn finer-grained information [22].
With this notion in hand, we can now state that whenever there is
an adversary that can succeed at distinguishing within non-private
advertising systems, then there exists an adversary that can succeed
in any private version of that system that preserves utility. More
precisely, a useful F
requires that the campaign size 𝑛 was
large enough to still obtain a useful result from the output of 𝑓
.
Here, 𝑛 plays the role of sample complexity from distribution testing,
which is the number of samples necessary to distinguish between
two distributions. Thus, our approach here is to show that with a
sufficiently-sized campaign in the private setting, an adversary can
learn the same information as in the non-private setting. Borrowing
from the conventions used in distribution testing, we focus on the
goal of distinguishing with advantage
in the non-private setting.
Specifically, we prove the following two lemmas.
Theorem 1. Any ads ecosystem composed of instantiations of
F
, F
, and F
that are useful (as defined by
Definitions 5.1 to 5.4, with the additional restriction that any non-
trivial implementation of F
must use differential privacy)
for a given ad campaign will not satisfy attribute privacy for some
attribute of that campaign’s audience.
Lemma 2. Let A = (A , 𝐸𝑛𝑣, A ) be an adversary. Consider any
two ad ecosystems:
We prove this theorem by showing that anything that could be
learned by an advertiser in a non-private advertising system could
similarly be learned by advertiser in a private advertising system.
Proving this statement formally requires defining a game-based
privacy definition on top of our UC modeling. To that end, we define
the following random variable.
Definition 5.5. Let EXEC
be a random variable de-
noting the output distribution of an environment 𝐸𝑛𝑣 when interact-
ing with the ideal functionalities F
, F , F
,
– A non-private ecosystem with a targeting function 𝑓 that is 𝛼 -
useful with respect to a 𝑐𝑙𝑜𝑠𝑒 metric and the identity function 𝐼 as
the lens, an engagement function 𝑓 that is 𝛼 -useful with respect
to 𝑐𝑙𝑜𝑠𝑒, an attribution function 𝑓 that is 𝛼 -useful with respect
to 𝑓 , and that uses the identity function 𝐼 for reporting.
– A private ecosystem with a (possibly different) targeting function
𝑓
that is 𝛼
-useful with respect to the same 𝑐𝑙𝑜𝑠𝑒 metric and
filtering lens 𝜌 , and with a reporting function 𝑓
, where 𝜖 < 1
that is 𝛼 -utility-preserving with respect to a processing function
𝑓 : D →{0, 1}.
F
and F
(connected as shown in Figure 2) in an in-
stance of the UC experiment.
For any distribution D over {0, 1} , for (D ,𝑎𝑢𝑥) ←A (1 , D ),
where D has the same support as D and both are over the domain
X, and for any collection of active-ads: if Adv
≥
,
then Adv
, where 𝑛 <
Typically in a game-based definition, we have a challenger that
sets up the parameters of the game (sampling randomness as needed)
and an adversary that is required to guess some function of the
challenger’s randomness.
≥
·
. Here, 𝐾 is a
computable term that depends only on X, active-ads, D , D and
·
<
·
.
Definition 5.6 (Distinguishing). We say that an adversary A =
(A , 𝐸𝑛𝑣, A ) succeeds in distinguishing with probability 𝑝 with re-
spect to a distribution D , processing function 𝑓 D →{0, 1}, and
an advertising system defined by the parameters (𝑓 , 𝜌, 𝑓 , 𝑓 , 𝑓 , 𝑓 ,𝑛)
if:
Lemma 3. For any ads ecosystem where there exists an adver-
sary with distinguishing advantage Adv
> 0, this ads
ecosystem will not satisfy attribute privacy.
𝑝 = 2 · Pr[A (𝑓 (EXEC
),𝑎𝑢𝑥) = 𝑏] − 1,
Proof Sketch. We formally prove Theorem 1 in Section C. It follows
immediately from Theorems 2 and 3.
To prove Theorem 2, we show that utility implies the ability to
distinguish the underlying distribution used by the ads ecosystem.
Namely, any successful distinguisher for a given advertising cam-
paign in a non-private ads ecosystem can be used to construct a
distinguisher for the same campaign run in a useful, private ads

--- Page 11 ---
ecosystem, albeit with a larger campaign size. The main idea behind
our proof of Theorem 2 is that, while the private version of an ads
ecosystem may have less utility than a non-private version, as long
as it preserves some utility, then it is possible to amplify this signal
to match the utility of the non-private version. The “cost” of ampli-
fication is in increasing the size of the campaign 𝑛, which provides
the adversary with more samples to use in its distinguishing. We
can leverage distribution testing techniques [9, 18, 23] to find a
bound on this new campaign size 𝑛 .
The proof of Theorem 3 follows from the definition of attribute
privacy (Definition 3.1) and the ability of our distinguisher to iden-
tify the underlying distribution used by the private ads ecosystem.
Specifically, if attribute privacy were achieved for all parameters
governing the distribution of users in F
, then by definition
Figure 8: Impact of privatization on sample complexity.
the summary statistic output by F
should be independent
of changes to this distribution. However, were this the case, then
the output of F
would be independent of the choice of 𝐷 or
𝐷 and no successful distinguisher could exist. Since Theorem 3
assumes the opposite, there must exist some parameter of the un-
derlying distribution for which attribute privacy is not preserved.
We explore the idea that not every attribute may require such pro-
tection, i.e., that some inferences may be acceptable, in Section 6.
5.3
Empirical Sample Complexity
The ‘non-private’ line still shows a substantial increase over the
baseline due to the loss of accuracy from targeting and the drop in
user engagement, while the ‘private’ line indicates the impact of
further reducing targeting accuracy and, more importantly, intro-
ducing noise from differential privacy. The private and non-private
lines begin to converge at higher sample complexity due to the
lower relative impact of differential privacy for larger sample set
sizes. We provide plots on the individual impacts of 𝛼-targeting,
𝛼-engagement, and 𝜖-differential privacy in Section D.
To provide some intuition and empirical data for the concrete sam-
ple complexity increase that we showed theoretically in Theorem 2,
we implemented our ideal advertising functionalities in Python
6
Redefining Privacy for Advertising
and ran the distinguishing game from Section 5.2 for concrete real-
izations of our parameterizing functions and 𝛼-utility parameters.
Recall that 𝛼-utility for targeting is an indication of how tightly
the parameterizing function respects its definition of 𝑐𝑙𝑜𝑠𝑒(), or
how accurate targeting is able to be. The expectation is that private
advertising ecosystems will likely have less of an ability to find the
true closest ad for a user—whether through using less user data or
less precise data—and we handle this challenge by decreasing the
𝛼 parameter for targeting from the non-private version. Relatedly,
𝛼-utility for engagement represents how likely a user is to click on
an ad at all; this is entirely about user behavior, so it does not vary
between the private and non-private ad ecosystems. Our metrics
parameterizing function is instantiated using differential privacy,
as this is the most common method currently being proposed.
To run our empirical distinguishing game, we fix a campaign
with two ads (𝑎𝑑 and 𝑎𝑑 ) differing in a single bit 𝑏 , and a
distribution D representing the “ground truth” distribution of
users. We then create an alternate distribution D based off the
same covariance matrix as D , varying the marginal probability
of 𝑏 in D to gradually increase the total variation distance
between D and D . We plot the sample complexity required to
distinguish D from D at a p-value of 0.05 using the uniformly
most powerful tests from Awan and Slavkovic [7] for a private
ads ecosystem in Figure 8. Then, using a standard binomial test to
distinguish, we plot a non-private version of the same ecosystem as
well as a baseline to demonstrate the increase in sample complexity.
Our results are a clear indication that the path forward for private
advertising requires a careful re-imagining of what privacy should
mean. That is, if we accept that some leakage is a necessary part of
the advertising ecosystem, then how should advertising systems rea-
son about the risks posed by this leakage? To start this process, we
begin by introducing the perspectives of three stakeholder groups
that inform this future: the people receiving targeted advertise-
ments, advertising networks, and regulatory bodies. By identifying
commonalities across these viewpoints—and gaps between existing
policies and end-users needs—we hope a path forward can emerge.
In Section 6.1, we employ the contextual integrity framework
[71] to help delimit when leakage may be (in)appropriate. We con-
trast under what conditions users, ad tech, and regulatory bodies
consider different categories of data to be sensitive , and thus
deserving of stronger protections. We then outline how existing en-
forcement mechanisms tailored to data sensitivity fail, despite laws
and well-aligned ad tech policies. The principles underlying exist-
ing private metrics proposals offer technical solutions to some of
these gaps, but they ultimately fall short of meeting user’s privacy
expectations. We argue that future proposals for privacy-preserving
metrics must be targeting-aware in order to (1) discern between the
implications of different information leakages and (2) understand
that risks associated with leakage are context dependent. In doing
so, private metrics systems of the future can apply alternate notions
of privacy, such as attribute privacy [105], that can protect sensitive
features about advertising audiences as a whole.

--- Page 12 ---
Appropriateness of Targeting on Feature
Sensitive Data
As perceived by...
People
Ad Tech
Law
health
;
;
;
relationship
.
.
✓
political beliefs
;
;
;
sexuality
;
;
;
gender
✓
8
8
location
.
8
8
age
✓
8
8
be more subtle. For example, while relationship status is used to
target both ads for dating services and those for divorce lawyers,
people are far less comfortable with the latter than the former, de-
spite the same data being used in both cases [80]. This sentiment
is captured by ad tech policy, which prohibits targeting based on
“personal hardship”—such as divorce—or advertisements that “im-
pose negativity” (e.g., body shaming). Similarly, targeting on the
basis of features that people generally find acceptable, like age or
gender, is illegal when the impact of that advertising results in
discriminatory systems. As a result, regulations such as the Fair
Housing Act (FHA) [31] have been used to prohibit use of charac-
teristics like age, race, and gender for all housing or employment
advertisements in the United States [72] and to enact changes to
the targeting algorithm in the same vein [91].
Figure 9: ✓ is used to indicate that targeting on this feature
is acceptable/permitted, ; indicates that targeting is always
considered unacceptable/prohibited, 8 indicates that target-
ing is permitted unless illegal (in the case of tech policy) or
discriminatory (in the case of regulations), and . indicates
that targeting is conditionally acceptable.
6.1
Sensitivity in Advertising
Enforcement problems stymie policies’ promise. Advertise-
ment targeting is extremely opaque and largely built on machine
learning models, making both technological and legal enforcement
of these policies challenging [2, 19, 76]. The behavior of machine
learning models is prohibitively difficult to interrogate, making it
challenging to prove discrimination [3, 35, 54, 75, 88, 97]. Despite
some efforts on the part of ad networks to mitigate bias [91], it
has been found that these targeting systems distribute advertise-
ments in a discriminatory way even when it is not the intention of
advertisers [3]. It is also possible to intentionally circumvent pro-
tections using proxy features or “lookalike audiences” [4, 45, 98].
Circumventing protections this way is, of course, against policy,
but even the ad networks themselves have been caught using an
opaquely-defined audience to illegally target ads to children [68].
Often the opaque nature of targeting allows companies to avoid
accountability with initial lawsuits struggling to prove discrimina-
tion [40, 93]. Moreover, it took until late 2023 for courts to recognize
that ad networks, not only advertisers, are liable for the discrimi-
natory targeting of ads [20]. Successful litigation has often had to
circumvent the root problem of the use of sensitive data in targeted
advertising to instead focus on how that data was collected, relying
on regulations for deceptive business practices [30] or even wiretap-
ping [10, 101]. This makes it burdensome for users to enforce their
rights. Finally, while advertising is global, regulations decidedly
are not and this ultimately limits the ability of even the strongest
regulations to protect the privacy of all users.
6.2
Metrics is Sensitivity Agnostic
Users, advertising technology companies, and regulators all agree
that some types of information about individuals are sensitive and
inappropriate to use in an advertising context. In this section, we
use the framework of contextual integrity [71] to interrogate the
conditions under which transmitting metrics from the ad network
to the advertiser are appropriate. Explicitly, contextual integrity
considers the flow of specific information types about a subject
between a sender and recipient via a transmission principle and de-
termines whether this flow is appropriate. In the setting of this paper,
ad networks (source) transmit various types of data (ad targeting
features) about the users (subject) in ad audiences to advertisers
(recipient) via metrics reports (transmission principle) about ad
delivery and engagement. Whether this process is perceived as
appropriate largely depends on what type of information was used
in targeting, which is the focus of Figure 9.
Contextual integrity allows us to bring nuance to our data cat-
egorizations. It isn’t that advertisements can never feature health
or sexuality information—in fact, it is often actively beneficial to
promote awareness of mental health support options or to advertise
events at LGBT organizations. Thus, our focus is specifically on
data sensitivity in the context using these data types (implicitly or
explicitly) to target advertisements and conduct market research, not
simply displaying ads.
The strongest ad tech policies [44] and modern, advertising-
specific regulations like the Digital Services Act (DSA) [33] both
align quite closely with user preferences. Unfortunately, it has
proved difficult to enforceably put these policies into practice.
If there existed meaningful enforcement of existing laws and ad
targeting policies—and confidence that these strong laws and poli-
cies applied across the full advertising ecosystem—then perhaps we
would not need to be as concerned about information leakage. But
without such enforcement, there is a real risk that the information
leaking from the system will directly concern sensitive data. In this
section, we turn our attention to metrics in the hope that it can
make up for the identified failures of targeting.
Existing policies are sophisticated and nuanced. While some
types of personal data (like health data) are always considered sen-
sitive in the context of ad targeting [33, 44, 49], other features can
Metrics is well-positioned to facilitate policy enforcement.
Metrics does not face the same structural challenges that make
aligning targeting systems and people’s privacy preferences so
difficult. First, the fraught (and legally tricky) decisions on which
advertisements should be shown to which users have already been
made. Second, the systems that collect and compute metrics are

--- Page 13 ---
6.3
Closing the Gap
dramatically simpler and more transparent than those used to tar-
get advertisements. Thus, the metrics infrastructure could aid in
identifying and documenting policy violations.
Users also have significant agency that they can exert when it
comes to metrics. While users have no choice in the advertising
networks to which they are subjected while browsing the internet,
users’ choice of browsers and devices are directly tied to the way
their data is collected and processed within metrics. In principle,
this creates an opportunity for organizations to compete in order
to make their metrics systems as well-aligned with user’s privacy
preferences as possible. Indeed, different groups of ad tech compa-
nies are currently working on competing proposals for privatizing
metrics [42, 47]. Importantly, these proposals are designed to be
interoperable, meaning that no matter which system was used to
target an advertisement, a variety of organizations, each offering
a different suite of privacy protections, are capable of producing
equivalent metrics output.
While data sensitivity provides clear intuition for managing the
risks of information leakage, the existing paradigms within which
advertising systems are designed are insufficient to actualize this
approach. Within targeting, there has been significant policy work
to set standards for the treatment of sensitive data, but there are
structural barriers to enforcing these policies. On the other hand,
emerging metrics proposals are technologically sophisticated and
relatively transparent, but are incapable of enforcing normative pri-
vacy policies because they lack context on how ads were targeted.
In order to close this gap, we advocate for expanding the ap-
proaches that are being used to think about privacy when devel-
oping new targeting and metrics proposals. There is tremendous,
ongoing technical work integrating differential privacy into met-
rics computation in which researchers are leveraging cutting-edge
privacy-enhancing technologies to significantly improve people’s
concrete privacy [47, 90]. These efforts, however, cannot be the sum
total of the solution. Specifically, future developments need to ap-
ply the same, policy-oriented analyses to metrics that are currently
being applied to targeting. We advocate for the inclusion of group
privacy notions, like attribute privacy, that explicitly account for
privacy harms not covered by differential privacy. Namely, as we
introduced in Section 3.2 and expanded on here, what data is leaked
can be just as, if not more, important than how much information
is revealed. This is especially true because advertisers can combine
“private” metrics with already-known information about individual
members of the audience, such as their identities [81].
However, applying attribute privacy to advertising metrics re-
quires co-design across targeting and metrics protocols as, while
targeting possesses the necessary information about data sensitivity,
metrics does not. Distributional privacy notions naturally require
information about the underlying distribution of users targeted
by an advertisement which is not currently available to metrics
protocols. Making metrics systems targeting-aware by giving it
the audience information for its reports would allow for the use
of definitions like attribute privacy and could, perhaps, even per-
mit metrics protocols to monitor targeting for policy violations or
discriminatory behavior. When targeting and metrics are run by
different organizations, there may even be incentives to do this type
of mutual monitoring. While there will no-doubt be significant tech-
nical (and even legal) hurdles in implementing such a vision, the
result would be better alignment between the privacy preferences
of users and the privacy properties of advertising ecosystems.
7
Conclusion
Current proposals fall short. We identify three reasons why
current proposals for privacy-preserving metrics do not adequately
enforce policy. First, their technical underpinnings rely on aggre-
gation [32] and the injection of statistically-calibrated noise (i.e.,
differential privacy [37]). The result is an implicit understanding
that privacy in advertising is about preserving the confidentiality
of individuals’ features. As we observe in this work, however, some
amount of leakage is inherent, and the leakage these systems per-
mit is fundamentally de-contextualized, i.e., it is at odds with the
understanding that not all types of data should be treated the same,
as demonstrated by Figure 9.
Second, current metrics proposals are unaware of the content
and target audience of the advertisements whose performance they
measure. Thus, an ad campaign promoting clothing is treated identi-
cally to an ad campaign promoting therapy, despite the difference in
the sensitivity of the data likely used to target these advertisements.
Similarly, an ad campaign that uses gender to target clothing adver-
tisements is indistinguishable from one that uses gender to target
employment advertisements, despite the difference in how the law
sees these campaigns. This is intentional; existing metrics systems
embraced data minimization within their design, and differentiat-
ing between advertisements or audience would require collating
this data across multiple systems (i.e., from targeting systems to
metrics systems). While data minimization is generally the right
approach for system design, in this case it has rendered metrics
incapable of discerning between information leakages that people
might consider harmful and innocuous.
Third, existing metrics proposals treat differential privacy as a
privacy panacea, when, in fact, there are cases in which inference
itself can be harmful (see Section 3.2). Specifically, there are audi-
ence types, so called “custom audiences,” defined using personally
identifiable information. In these cases, the inference facilitated
by differential privacy has qualitatively different risk as learning a
feature of their audience also gives them confidence that individual
members of the audience possess this feature, contrary to the likely
expectations of those audience members.
In this work we have taken a step back to study what notions of
privacy are possible within advertising. We showed that any adver-
tising system that is even minimally useful must also allow some
amount of information leakage. Taking this as a given, we identify
the sensitivity of data as an important consideration when it comes
to managing this leakage—a decision which has significant impli-
cations on how future privacy-preserving advertising proposals
should be designed.

--- Page 14 ---
Acknowledgments
This research was supported by the DARPA SIEVE program un-
der Agreement No. HR00112020021 and by the National Science
Foundation under Grants No. 1955270, 2209194, 2217770, 2228610,
2230670, and 2330065.
References

--- Page 15 ---

--- Page 16 ---
versus D . For the first and last games, our objective is to distinguish
between distributions D and chosen distribution D . However,
some of our intermediate games are defined with different types of
outputs that correspond to partial execution of a hybrid between
the non-private and private ad ecosystems. Between each game
we will show that the adversary’s advantage is preserved with the
appropriate increase to the campaign size—which corresponds to
the sample complexity of distinguishing between the distributions.
Overview. To summarize our approach, the goal of this proof is
to relate the adversary’s advantage of distinguishing in the private
case with their advantage of distinguishing in the non-private game
in terms of the relative increase in the sample complexity required
to distinguish. Recall that, in our setting, the sample complexity
is the campaign size. The first game G represents distinguishing
between the two distributions in the non-private setting, and the
final game G is in the private setting. Each game G makes a slight
modification to the advertising ecosystem from the game before
it G , and throughout this sequence of hybrids we show that
the adversary still has a non-trivial advantage in distinguishing
given a certain increase in the number of samples available. These
games primarily leverage how the utility definitions require the two
distributions to have certain properties to have been distinguishable
in the non-private setting. We then leverage results and techniques
from the distribution testing literature to derive the updated sample
complexity and distinguishing advantage for each game.
Facts. To begin, we state a few facts relating Hellinger distance
and sample complexity that we will reference throughout the proof:
Fact 1 (Folklore, restated in [23]). The Hellinger distance
characterizes the sample complexity𝑆𝐶 = Θ(1/𝐻 (𝑃,𝑄)) between
two distributions 𝑃,𝑄.
Fact 2 ([9], Theorem 4.7). If a distinguisher for two distributions
𝑃,𝑄 has error 𝛽, then the sample complexity for distingushing between
these distributions is lower bounded as follows: 𝑆𝐶 >
Fact 3 ([23], Corollary 2.2). The sample complexity for distin-
guishing between two distributions 𝑃,𝑄 is upper bounded as follows:
𝑆𝐶 <
.
A
Proof of Theorem 2
Fact 4 ([18], Theorem 2). If the sample complexity 𝑆𝐶 for
distinguishing two distributions 𝑃,𝑄 with success probability ≥ 1 − 𝛽
is 𝑛, then the sample complexity for distinguishing between these
distributions 𝑃,𝑄 subject to 𝜖-differential privacy (where 𝜖 < 1)
𝑆𝐶
with success probability ≥
(1 − 𝛽) +
.
is bounded as follows:
𝑛 ≤ 𝑆𝐶
≤
=
In this appendix, we provide a formal proof of Theorem 2. Suppose
A = (A , 𝐸𝑛𝑣, A ) is an adversary such that Adv
>
Recall that the Hellinger distance for two discrete probability
distributions 𝑃,𝑄 with domain X is given by
for a non-private ad ecosystem. We proceed via a sequence
of games to show that this implies that A still has advantage
Adv
∑︁
√︁
𝑃(𝑥) −
√︁
𝑄(𝑥)

𝐻 (𝑃,𝑄) = 1
2
>
in the private case. That is: the adver-
sary can continue to have a similar advantage in the private case,
so long as the campaign size is appropriately amplified.
.
Here and elsewhere in the proof we will use Í
as shorthand
for Í
.
Now we will detail the series of games:
Notation. In each game G , we define Adv
to be the advantage
of adversary A = (A
, 𝐸𝑛𝑣 , A
) in distinguishing between exe-
cutions of the specified games starting from input distributions D

--- Page 17 ---
G (Non-private ecosystem). This game is the non-private ecosys-
tem, so Adv
= Adv
>
.
Let 𝑘 be the number of Report messages that 𝐸𝑛𝑣 sends to
F
. Then, the output of metrics is a series of reports ˆ𝑟 =
{𝑟 , ...,𝑟 }. Let 𝑓 be the processing function that the adversary A
is using to distinguish over. Thus, distinguishing on this output
would indicate both that:
G (Add (𝑓
, 𝜌)): Targeting and Engagement utility mean that
some information about the difference in the two distributions is
still leaked, and we can use distribution testing to distinguish here.
So, in this game, we replace (𝑓 , 𝐼) with (𝑓
, 𝜌), where 𝑓
is 𝛼
useful
with respect to 𝑐𝑙𝑜𝑠𝑒 and 𝜌. As in the previous game, we focus on
the task of A being able to distinguish the combined output of
F
with respect to the pair:
(audience , ad ), (audience , ad ) ∈ active-ads.
(1) There is a difference in the underlying distribution of user
features in D and D , and
(2) This difference corresponds to the features targeted by the
two ads that are being A/B tested.
From the first observation that D and D are different, Fact 1 gives
us that the Hellinger distance characterizes the sample complexity
𝑆𝐶 = Θ(1/𝐻 (D , D )) between two distributions. From the
second observation that the statistical test 𝑓 is measuring some
specific property of the distributions (i.e., A/B testing on a feature),
we find that the distributions must differ in regards to that particular
property.
In particular, we want to show that by expanding the campaign
size, we can construct an adversary that will be able to still distin-
guish with the same advantage. We leverage the fact that the size
of the campaign determines the number of samples pulled from
the distribution D . Thus, by finding the sample complexity for
distinguishing between the output distributions, we can determine
the necessary campaign size. We note that the adversary could in
theory construct a small campaign or one that is not relevant to
the difference between the distributions, but our requirement that
the adversary is able to distinguish eliminates the need to consider
such scenarios.
We note that advertisers will try to use F
to deliver an ad
dependent on a particular test feature. In this case, the addition of
(𝑓
, 𝜌) continues to allow targeting based on this feature, however,
just less accurately (our analysis also holds for the case where
𝛼
= 0). Formally, for the pair (audience , ad ), (audience , ad )
and a feature vector representing a user 𝑥, if
𝑐𝑙𝑜𝑠𝑒(audience ,𝑥) − 𝑐𝑙𝑜𝑠𝑒(audience ,𝑥) = Δ ,
then:
Pr [ad ← 𝑓 (active-campaigns, 𝜌(𝑥), site)]
− Pr [ad ← 𝑓 (active-campaigns, 𝜌(𝑥), site)] ≥ 𝛼
· Δ ,
where 𝛼
< 𝛼 .
We note that the size of the campaign that is distinguishable
in the non-private setting is 𝑛 with success probability
(since
the advantage is
G (Switch to A = (A , 𝐸𝑛𝑣 , A
)): In this game, we consider an
adversary who receives the input of Metrics rather than the output.
This is essentially a data processing inequality: anything that is
performed by Metrics can instead be performed by the adversary
itself if it is helpful in its distinguishing role.
In more detail, consider a modified 𝐸𝑛𝑣’ that does not inter-
act with F
, and uses the input to the metrics functionality
as its output. In particular, the output distribution from 𝐸𝑛𝑣’ is a
function of the total output from F
. Now, we will show
why A implies we can construct a A
that can distinguish here.
If the output of F
is distinguishable, then its input must
also be distinguishable with advantage at least Adv
. Note that
the input to metrics is the output of engagement, which is a list
of browsing histories {(site, ad, conversion)} for each user. For-
mally, we can say that for 𝑛 users, the output of engagement is
{browsing-history , ..., browsing-history }, where for user 𝑖
with features features :
). Additionally, the distribution of the output of
engagement is the distribution of ad conversions. In particular, we
can look at the conversions for (audience , ad ) in comparison to
(audience , ad ). We express this by
browsing-history
= {(site , ad , 𝑓 (features , site , ad )), ...}
𝑅 (𝑥) = Pr[𝑥𝑠𝑎𝑚𝑝𝑙𝑒𝑑𝑓𝑟𝑜𝑚 D ] Pr[𝑠ℎ𝑜𝑤𝑥 ad ] Pr[𝑥𝑐𝑙𝑖𝑐𝑘𝑠𝑜𝑛 ad ]
where
= D (𝑥) · ( 1 + 𝛼 · Δ
2
) · (𝛼 · 𝑐𝑙𝑜𝑠𝑒(ad ,𝑥)).
ad = 𝑓 (active-campaigns, features , site ).
From Fact 1 we know 𝑛 = Θ(1/𝐻 (𝑅 , 𝑅 )) and in particular
from Facts 2 and 3 that
Additionally, we note that for these to result in a distinguishable
set of reports, there must be some pair:
ln(
(audience , ad ), (audience , ad ) ∈ active-ads
)
4 · 𝐻 (𝑅 , 𝑅 ) < 𝑛 <
1
𝐻 (𝑅 , 𝑅 ) .
For the private case, we have the updated distributions for the
output of engagement:
𝑅
(𝑥) = Pr[𝑥𝑠𝑎𝑚𝑝𝑙𝑒𝑑𝑓𝑟𝑜𝑚 D ] Pr[𝑠ℎ𝑜𝑤𝑥 ad ] Pr[𝑥𝑐𝑙𝑖𝑐𝑘𝑠𝑜𝑛 ad ]
that had distinguishable metrics. Since metrics simply performs
post-processing on the result of engagement, there exists an ad-
versary A
that can distinguish this pair with advantage Adv
≥
Adv
.
= D (𝑥) · ( 1 + 𝛼
· Δ
2
) · (𝛼 · 𝑐𝑙𝑜𝑠𝑒(ad ,𝑥)).
Therefore, the campaign size needed for the adversary to distin-
guish would be

--- Page 18 ---
ln(
)
4 · 𝐻 (𝑅
, 𝑅
) < 𝑛
<
1
𝐻 (𝑅
, 𝑅
) .
of these like terms then canceled out between the numerator and
denominator and we were left with a relatively simple expression
of the ratio.
By looking at how the expression
grows with 𝐾 and noting
that 0 ≤ 𝐾 we can find additional bounds on 𝑛
. In particular,
1 ≤
<
so we have
Note that D , D , 𝑅 , 𝑅 , 𝑅
, 𝑅
all have the same domain X, which
is the universe of potential users.
In order to compute the bound on expansion factor 𝑧 = 𝑛 /𝑛 we
must take an upper bound for the private case and a lower bound
for the non-private case. Let 𝛾 =
 , then
𝑛 · 𝛾 < 𝑛 < 𝑛 · 𝛾 𝛼
𝛼
.
𝑧 = 𝛾𝐻 (𝑅 , 𝑅 )
𝐻 (𝑅
, 𝑅
)
𝑅 (𝑥) −
√︁
𝑅 (𝑥)

Í
√︁
=
𝛾
𝑅
(𝑥) −
√︁
𝑅
(𝑥)

Í
√︁
The lower bound tells us that when 𝐾 approaches 0, which indi-
cates that 𝐵 << 𝐴 (there is a very small difference in the closeness
of users to the two audiences) then this ratio is dominated by 𝛾.
However, the upper bound tells us that when 𝐴 << 𝐵 (there is a
very large difference in the closeness of users to the two audiences)
then this ratio is dominated by
√︄
∑︁
D (𝑥) ·
 1 + 𝛼 · Δ

· (𝛼 · close(ad ,𝑥))−
= 𝛾 1
2
2
©­
«
√︄
D (𝑥) ·
 1 + 𝛼 · Δ
2
. Thus, private targeting mecha-
nisms make the most difference when there is a large difference in
how close users are to the two potential audiences in question.
As a result, there exists an adversary can distinguish by increas-
ing the number of samples (campaign size) to 𝑛 to distinguish.
They can use their knowledge of D , D , 𝛼 , 𝛼
, 𝜌, 𝛼 to compute
this value. Thus Adv
= 2/3 = Adv
.

· (𝛼 · close(ad ,𝑥))ª ®
¬
√︄
∑︁
/1

· (𝛼 · close(ad ,𝑥))−
2
D (𝑥) ·
 1 + 𝛼
· Δ
2
©­
«
√︄
D (𝑥) ·
 1 + 𝛼
· Δ
2

· (𝛼 · close(ad ,𝑥))ª ®
¬
G (Distinguish on metrics again): In this game, we use the fact
that metrics doesn’t do anything currently, so it does not impact the
adversary’s advantage. Hence, we will switch back to interacting
with 𝐸𝑛𝑣, whose output is a function of the output of F
,
where we are still using 𝐼 as our report creation function. Thus,
like in the non-private case, reporting is transparently forwarding
through the results from engagement. Thus, Adv
= Adv
.
D (𝑥) −
√︁
D (𝑥)

)
√︁
=
𝛾𝛼
Í
close(ad ,𝑥)(
D (𝑥) −
√︁
D (𝑥)

𝛼
Í
close(ad ,𝑥)(
)
√︁
D (𝑥) −
√︁
D (𝑥)

=
𝛾 Í
close(ad ,𝑥)(1 + 𝛼 · Δ )
√︁
D (𝑥) −
√︁
D (𝑥)

Í
close(ad ,𝑥)(1 + 𝛼
· Δ )
√︁
= 𝛾 𝐴 + 𝛼 𝐵
𝐴 + 𝛼
𝐵 = 𝛾 1 + 𝛼 𝐾
1 + 𝛼
𝐾.
Thus, we have 𝑛 < 𝑛 · 𝛾
where
D (𝑥) −
√︁
D (𝑥)

𝐴 =
∑︁
close(ad ,𝑥)
√︁
,
D (𝑥) −
√︁
D (𝑥)

𝐵 =
∑︁
close(ad ,𝑥)Δ
√︁
and 𝐾 =
.
As shown above we computed this ratio by simplifying down
the expression
𝛾
𝑅 (𝑥) −
√︁
𝑅 (𝑥)

Í
√︁
𝑅
(𝑥) −
√︁
𝑅
(𝑥)
 .
Í
√︁
We did this by expanding out the terms defining these distribu-
tions and identifying that the differences in the numerator and
denominator both had like terms that could be factored out. Many
G (Add 𝑓
): In this final game, we leverage the fact that metrics
has utility, and therefore being able to still perform statistical tests
in the private setting means the differences in the distributions
remain detectable and we can use differentially-private distribution
testing techniques to distinguish here. In more detail, we now use
the reporting function 𝑓
(with respect to 𝑓 ) instead of the identity
𝐼. Because 𝑓
is 𝛼 -utility-preserving with respect to 𝑓 , this means
that the impact of the reporting function on the statistical test
cannot be more that 𝛼 . As mentioned in Definition 5.4, 𝛼 can be
thought of as a bound on the change in the error rate for 𝑓 .
Like in our previous games, our goal here is to show that by
amplifying the size of the campaign, we can still allow for the
adversary to distinguish with a noticeable advantage. Crucially, in
order to use this to find the necessary sample complexity, we need
to show that the two distributions are not the same, as otherwise
the result will be undefined.
We know that the underlying D and D distributions are dif-
ferent and that from G that this difference is distinguishable on
the output of engagement. Thus, the question is whether the re-
porting function may completely flatten this difference. However,
we know that 𝑓
is bounded in how much it can impact the result
of the statistical test 𝑓 that is performed on the data. Since this
test is measuring a property that is different between D and D
(observation (2) from G ), that means that 𝑓
cannot completely flat-
ten this difference. Thus, the distributions of interest here: 𝑓
(𝑅
)
and 𝑓
(𝑅
) must have a non zero difference. (This is a slight abuse

--- Page 19 ---
of notation but 𝑓
(𝑅
) is the final distribution from applying the
reporting function to the engagement output distribution 𝑅
.)
We can make use of Fact 4 which gives us that the sample com-
plexity for distingushing between these distributions 𝑓
(𝑅
), 𝑓
(𝑅
)
𝑆𝐶
is𝑛
≤ 𝑆𝐶
≤
with advantage 2(
(
)+
)−1 =
Adv
.
Thus, we can apply this and set the amplified campaign size to
𝑛 =
<
· 𝑛 · 𝛾
. This value is computable with
the information used to construction 𝑅
as well as the 𝜖 parameter
used in reporting. With this campaign size we have a distinguishing
advantage Adv
=
.
Adv
.
The overall lemma follows by combining the bounds on each
pair of adjacent games. This gives us a distinguishing advantage
𝑝 = Adv
=
Adv
=
=
= 𝑝 −
Figure 10: Impact of 𝜖 on sample complexity.
B
Proof of Theorem 3
Figure 11: Impact of 𝛼-engagement on sample complexity.
By Theorem 2 we see that for such an ad ecosystem, we will
have an adversary A that can distinguish between D and D with
probability
We will now show why any ad ecosystem where an adversary
A = (A , 𝐸𝑛𝑣, A ) has advantage Adv
> 0 in distin-
guishing between two distributions D and D , means that this ad
ecosystem cannot achieve Dataset Attribute Privacy as defined in
Definition 3.1. In this case, the audience of users is a set of feature
vectors, where each attribute is just a single bit that is 1 if the user
has that feature.
Assume for the sake of contradiction that this ad ecosystem has
dataset attribute privacy where the private function 𝑔(𝑋 ) is a sum
of the values of the 𝑖 feature. Also, let 𝑓 be the summary statistic
𝐹, which reveals how many users in the dataset had that feature.
From the fact that a distinguisher A exists, we know that the
output of the environment is distinguishable. This directly implies
that the output of F
is distinguishable between the two prob-
ability distributions D and D . In particular, if 𝑘 was the total
number of reports that 𝐸𝑛𝑣 requested from F
, the output it
distinguishes on is a list of reports ˆ𝑟 = {𝑟 , ...,𝑟 }. Let 𝑓 be the
processing function such that the output of the adversary is the
output of 𝑓 (ˆ𝑟). Since, ˆ𝑟 = {𝑟 , ...,𝑟 } is distinguishble, there must
be some 𝑟 ∈ ˆ𝑟 that is distinguishable.
By Definition 3.1 if attribute privacy were achieved for all param-
eters governing the distribution of users in F
then the output
. By, Theorem 3 we see that if such a distinguishing
adversary exists, then this ad ecosystem will not satisfy attribute
privacy for some attribute of that campaign’s audience.
Thus, we conclude that any useful ads ecosystem for a given ad
campaign will not satisfy attribute privacy for some attribute of
that campaign’s audience.
D
Extended Empirical Evaluation
of 𝑓 (ˆ𝑟) should be independent of which distribution F
sam-
pled users from (D vs D ). However, A is able to distinguish on
this output, which implies that there must be some report where
the result is dependent on choice of distribution. Therefore, there
must be some attribute for which attribute privacy is not preserved.
This is a contradiction to our claim that we had attribute privacy,
and thus we conclude that the existence of an adversary that can
distinguish between the underlying distributions in an ad ecosystem
implies no attribute privacy.
C
Proof of Theorem 1
As shown in Figure 10, lower 𝜖 values increase the amount on
noise added to the differentially-private metrics which reduces the
confidence of the distinguisher at low sample sizes. As the number
of samples increases, the signal to noise ratio improves and the
sample complexity of the differentially-private lines approaches
the baseline.
𝛼-engagement impacts the overall click through rate so reduc-
ing this value reduces the overall click probability as shown in
Figure 11. Consequently, this reduces the absolute difference in
click probability between D and D making distinguishing more
challenging. Generally, ad campaigns have very low click through
Our proof of Theorem 1 follows from Theorem 2 and Theorem 3
in a straightforward manner. Suppose we had an ads ecosystem
composed of instantiations of F
, F
, and F
that are useful (as defined by Definitions 5.1 to 5.4).

--- Page 20 ---
at a more manageable level of noise. The framework consists of
three parts:
Figure 12: Impact of 𝛼-targeting on sample complexity.
(1) A set of secrets S: this is the information that should not be
revealed (or inferrable) by any output statistics. E.g., from
the examples above, the secrets would be the flu status of
any individual or their hair color.
(2) Pairs of potential secrets Q = (S × S): these are the values
of secrets that should be indistinguishable given the output.
For example: perhaps it should not be possible to distinguish
between “Alice has the flu” and “Alice is healthy,” or to dis-
tinguish between any combination of possible hair colors for
Alice (e.g., brown vs. green hair, brown vs. blonde hair, etc).
This list should be viewed as a denylist: any two events X
and Y that do not form a pair (X, Y) in the list are (implicitly)
allowed to be distinguishable by the adversary.
(3) A set of distributions Θ that could plausibly generate the
dataset: Θ defines the correlations between the individual
datapoints in the dataset. E.g., different Θ could specify vary-
ing levels of contagiousness for the flu or different probabili-
ties that an individual has a certain hair color given the hair
colors of their family members.
Definition E.1 (Definition 2.1 from Song et al. [87]). A privacy
mechanism 𝑀 is said to be 𝜖-Pufferfish private in a framework
(S, Q, Θ) if for all 𝜃 ∈ Θ with 𝑋 drawn from distribution 𝜃, for all
secret pairs (𝑠 ,𝑠 ) ∈Q, and for all 𝑤 ∈ Range(𝑀), we have
𝑒 ≤ 𝑃 (𝑀(𝑋) = 𝑤|𝑠 ,𝜃)
𝑃 (𝑀(𝑋) = 𝑤|𝑠 ,𝜃) ≤ 𝑒
(2)
when 𝑠 and 𝑠 are such that 𝑃(𝑠 |𝜃) ≠ 0, 𝑃(𝑠 |𝜃) ≠ 0.
rates (less than a percent) so low 𝛼-engagement values are the most
realistic.
Figure 12 depicts how 𝛼-targeting has a less strong impact on
overall sample complexity in distinguishing than either𝛼-engagement
or the 𝜖 value for differentially-private metrics. This is largely due
to the way we use it as a modifier for 𝑐𝑙𝑜𝑠𝑒() in the targeting utility
definition—most users are not a perfect match for the ad feature
vector and may be relatively close to both ads causing a small dif-
ference in probability of preferring one over the other even when
𝛼-targeting is 1. Alternative designs for targeting utility could have
𝛼-targeting instead indicate how likely targeting is to prefer the
closer ad, regardless of how close it was and in this case 𝛼-targeting
would have a stronger impact.
Additionally, we might expect the audience distribution and
definition of 𝑐𝑙𝑜𝑠𝑒() to affect how impactful 𝛼-targeting is. E.g., if
the audience is well-specified and the users tend to share similar
features aside from the test bit, then 𝑐𝑙𝑜𝑠𝑒() might decide to weight
that bit more strongly than the others when deciding which ad is
more relevant.
Attribute privacy uses the Pufferfish framework to focus on pri-
vatizing the distribution of sensitive attributes within a dataset.
There, the secrets S are the output of some function 𝑔() over that
sensitive attribute. Like most parameters in Pufferfish privacy, ex-
actly what 𝑔() is will be situational and differ between use cases.
Here, we care about the fraction of the audience who possesses the
sensitive attribute so 𝑔() computes this value.
E
Background on Pufferfish Privacy
The Pufferfish privacy framework [58] is intended to capture scenar-
ios where privacy is desired for sensitive data, and, moreover, the
sensitive data might be correlated with some of the other features in
the dataset. Whereas differential privacy treats all data as sensitive
and therefore requires hiding all correlations, Pufferfish privacy is
more flexible and allows for revealing some features but only up to
the point that sensitive data remains hidden. Consider for example
genetic traits or the transmission of disease: information about the
hair color of a person’s family members can allow for inferences of
their own hair color and knowing that many people in a person’s
community have the flu is revealing of that person’s health data.
Resolving this under standard DP typically involves considering
these correlated groups of people as a single entry. While this is
effective, it introduces unmanageable levels of noise as the group
size grows.
The Pufferfish framework allows for differentially-private statis-
tics on correlated data without assuming that all entries are fully
correlated. This allows it to achieve protection for correlated data
