
--- Page 1 ---
Secondary use under the
European Health Data Space:
setting the scene and towards a
research agenda on privacy-
enhancing technologies
Sarah van Drumpt
*, Kartik Chawla
, Tom Barbereau
,
Dayana Spagnuelo
and Linda van de Burgwal
The Regulation for European Health Data Space (EHDS) aims to address the
fragmented health data landscape across Europe by promoting ethical and
responsible reuse of data, seeking to balance the opportunities for data reuse
with the risks it entails. However, the techno-legal aspects of navigating this
balance remain poorly understood. This study adopts a qualitative and
inductive approach, using semi-structured interviews to explore the risks,
challenges,
and
gaps
in
the
implementation
of
privacy-enhancing
technologies (PETs) within EHDS, particularly in the context of its governance
structure and data permits for secondary data use. The ﬁndings identify ﬁve
distinct categories of concerns, based on fourteen risks, and highlight seven
governance and technological solutions, illustrating how these solutions
address
multiple,
often
correlated
risks.
The
interdependence
between
concerns and solutions emphasises the need for a strategic and integrated
approach to both governance and technology. This mapping between the
risks and solutions also highlights the central role of certain solutions, such as
public engagement and awareness, in addressing multiple risks. Furthermore, it
introduces a new dimension to the concerns by focusing on the structural
imbalances in access to the health data economy. We conclude by proposing
a research agenda to advance the integration of PETs into the EHDS
framework, ensuring that data permits can effectively facilitate secure, ethical,
and innovative health data use.
European Health Data Space, data permit, ethical secondary use, digital health, privacy
enhancing technologies
1 Introduction
The landscape of European health data is fragmented. To date, organisations,
researchers, and the government have found it increasingly difﬁcult to leverage existing
data, which are often not ﬁndable, accessible, interoperable, or reusable (1, 2). In
response and to strengthen the resilience of the healthcare system, the European
Commission’s data strategy is currently establishing the European Health Data Space
(EHDS) (3). This initiative comprises of rules, standards, and practices aimed at

--- Page 2 ---
To answer these questions, the paper is structured as follows.
Section 2 considers the background on the EHDS and PETs.
Section 3 introduces the qualitative, inductive research method
followed. Section 4 presents the ﬁndings from the qualitative data
collection and analysis; notably, (4.1) a systematic overview of
risks associated to the EHDS categorised in terms of concerns
(RQ1), (4.2) solutions to address these risks (RQ2), and (4.3)
exploring the gaps for applying PET (RQ3). Section 5 discusses
these ﬁndings and highlights a research agenda for PETs in the
EHDS. We conclude in Section 6.
2 Background
2.1 Primer on the European Health Data
Space
Proposed in 2022, the European Health Data Space (EHDS) is a
ﬂagship initiative of the European Union designed to transform the
secondary use and sharing of health data (3). The creation of the
EHDS – among other Common European Data Spaces in domains
such as agriculture or manufacturing (13) – is a central part of the
European strategy on digital data. The purpose of each data space
is to
establish
common
data
infrastructures
and
governance
frameworks, which facilitate data pooling, access and sharing (14).
Two of the primary goals of the EHDS, in line with the GDPR,
are to facilitate natural persons’ access to and control over their
personal electronic health data, in the context of healthcare, as
well as facilitating achieving “other purposes that involve the use
of electronic health data in the health and care sectors” (EHDS,
Recital 1). By facilitating secondary use of health data, the EHDS
aims to boost research, innovation, and policy making (EHDS,
Art. 53). Through the EHDS, researchers and policy makers can
have access to anonymised data sets to drive advances in
stimulating cross-organizational collaboration and secondary use
of data in healthcare, all while in adherence to the General Data
Protection Regulation (GDPR) (4).
The EHDS was established into law through Regulation (EU)
2025/327, ofﬁcially entering into force on March 26, 2025. This
regulation evolved from and signiﬁcantly expands upon the
existing Cross-Border Healthcare Directive (2011/24/EU), which
had initially set the groundwork by enabling EU Member States
to
voluntarily
exchange
digital
health
data,
particularly
ePrescriptions
and
Patient
Summaries,
through
the
MyHealth@EU platform. The EHDS formalises and broadens the
digital sharing of health information, including this cross-border
exchange of data. The EHDS regulation applies from 26 March
2026, though different aspects thereof shall apply in a staggered
manner as described in Art. 105.
The EHDS holds signiﬁcant promise to advance healthcare by
improving data accessibility for research, innovation, and policy
making (5). However, several challenges remain. Privacy and
security concerns, for example, are central, as the sensitive nature
of health data requires robust safeguards to protect individual
rights (6). The complexity of ensuring informed consent (or, in
the case of the EHDS, ensuring that the patients are appropriately
informed in order to opt-out if they wish to do so) in large-scale
secondary
use
of
data
initiatives
also
raises
ethical
issues,
particularly in ensuring that individuals fully understand how their
data will be used. Furthermore, ensuring equitable access to health
data and preventing potential misuse remains a critical challenge,
especially in balancing the beneﬁts of secondary use with respect
to individual autonomy and conﬁdentiality (7). Tensions can also
arise between different values, such as patient privacy and the
value of new treatment protocols (5, 8–10).
Creating conditions for ethical secondary use of data involves a
threading the needle between all of these varied concerns, and
maintaining
the
appropriate
equilibrium
between
regulatory
compliance and technological security. These conditions are set
in the overall governance structure of the EHDS and, crucially, in
data
permits.
Data
permits
are
a
critical
prerequisite
for
collaboration, and are required to be submitted by Data Users
(e.g., insurance companies, researchers) to a Health Data Access
Body (HDAB), which must correspondingly determine whether
to allow access to health data stored by Data Holders (e.g., health
institutions collecting patients’ data) for secondary use or not.
However, while some researchers have pointed towards Privacy-
Enhancing
Technologies
(PETs)
as
promising
solutions
to
address some of the concerns in European data spaces (11, 12),
little is known about how to approach this careful balance from
a techno-legal perspective.
In response, this research considers three interconnected
research questions:
RQ1: What are the risks associated with the EHDS for secondary
use of health data?
RQ2: What are potential solutions to address these problems?
RQ3: What are research gaps in the adoption of PETs in the
EHDS?

--- Page 3 ---
(4) publication of results. The entire process is supported by core
services managed by the European Commission.
Overall, the EHDS — while ambitious (5) — represents a
transformative step towards a more interconnected, efﬁcient, and
patient-centred healthcare system across Europe. It has the
potential to enhance individual healthcare experiences, stimulate
innovation,
and
improve
health
outcomes
throughout
the
continent. However, as mentioned, it also raises signiﬁcant
concerns, particularly regarding its implications for research,
legal frameworks and broader societal impacts (5, 8). Experts in
health policy, law, ethics and social sciences have cautioned that
the EHDS could undermine patient control over data, impede
healthcare and research initiatives, and diminish the public value
of health data sharing—issues that requires substantial policy
adjustments to realise the system’s intended beneﬁts (5). These
are the risks that we explore further in depth in this paper.
2.2 Privacy-enhancing technologies in
health
medical treatments, improve public health strategies, and develop
data-driven healthcare policies.
One of the cornerstones of the EHDS is the creation of a “legal
obligation on data holders to share electronic health data for
secondary purposes if certain conditions are met” (10). Under
the EHDS (3), any individual or organisation can request access
to electronic health data (“data user”) from a data holder (“any
natural or legal person, which is an entity or a body in the
health or care sector, or performing research in relation to these
sectors”) through a data request, as long as they meet the
requirements set out in Chapter IV. Despite the legal obligation
to share data for secondary use, access may be subject to fees to
cover costs related to assessing a data request, preparing and
making data available (EHDS, Art. 62). This refers to data
collected
primarily
through
clinical
care
or
research,
and
encompasses
electronic
health
records,
socioeconomic,
environmental
and
behavioural
data,
healthcare-related
administrative data, genetic information, among others (EHDS,
Art. 51). Data users can reuse this data for secondary purposes
(EHDS, Art. 53(1)), including scientiﬁc research, algorithmic
training, and personalised care through the Health Data Access
Bodies (EHDS, Art. 55). Within the scope of this paper, we focus
on secondary use of health data, and particularly in the context
of the second method of access, where multiple players are
involved share responsibilities over the data processing and
demonstration
of
compliance
with
regulations,
and
where
tensions or uncertainty might arise.
In Figure 1, based on Kalliola et al. (12), we sketch out the
process around the secondary use of data as managed by a
national contact point for the secondary use of health data
(NCP2). There are four main steps related to the types of data
interactions: (1) discovery; (2) application (to a permit); (3)
actual secondary use (in a secure processing environment); and
In an era where personalised medicine and large-scale data
sharing are transforming healthcare, the need for strong privacy
protections has grown. The need for these protections - coming
from both legal as well as ethical requirements - clashes with the
ever increasing need for access to greater amounts of data. The
term Privacy-Enhancing Technologies (PETs) is an umbrella
term that refers to a set of innovative methods that address this
(15, 16), by allowing sensitive data to be shared, analysed, and/or
used without undesirable exposing sensitive details (in health,
individual patient information for example). These technologies,
such as federated learning, secure multi-party computation, and
so on, help balance the need for valuable medical insights with

--- Page 4 ---
data (25) and qualitative coding techniques the method of
analysis (26, 27). This approach was selected given the relative
lack of available empirical knowledge on the EHDS, and on the
application of PETs in that context.
3.1 Data collection
For the study, we carried out 16 semi-structured interviews
with experts in the broader ﬁeld of healthcare whose work relates
to the EHDS. The interviews were conducted as part of a
research project funded by the Netherlands Organisation for
Applied Scientiﬁc Research (TNO) over the course of three
months (November 2024–February 2025). Interviewees were
selected on the basis of their topical expertise as well as their
afﬁliation (Supplementary Material). The core condition for the
selection of experts was their knowledge of the EHDS, their
involvement
in
preparatory efforts,
policy
discussions,
data
governance
structures,
research
or
implementation
planning
related
to
EHDS
processes.
The
group
of
experts
is
interdisciplinary by nature and it considers both, public and
private sector afﬁliations. They are understood as agents with
implicit and relevant knowledge on the topic of investigation (25).
Semi-structured interviews were selected as they are the most
appropriate in cases were little knowledge is available given their
ability to produce rich insights from a local, case speciﬁc context
(25). The semi-structured interviews were conducted following
an interview guide (Supplementary Material) that served to
streamline coverage of two principal thematic areas (28): data
permits and secondary use of health data. For each interview, the
questions were slightly adapted to match the interviewee’s
position, background and expertise (29). The interviews were
held via video conference and lasted around 60 min on average.
Each
interview
was
recorded
and
subsequently
transcribed
and coded.
3.2 Data analysis
the demands for strong privacy assurance. Different PETs offer
different beneﬁts and trade-offs, making them suitable for
various healthcare applications (11). For example, some methods
prioritize
data
utility,
while
others
offer
stronger
privacy
guarantees at the cost of increased computational complexity or
reduced model performance. Some focus on input privacy (e.g.,
federated learning) and enable linking data across sources to a
single individual (e.g., secure multi-party computation), others
target output privacy (e.g., differential privacy), while some allow
veriﬁcation without disclosing the underlying data (e.g., zero-
knowledge
proofs).
To
further
explore
the
scope
and
implementation of PETs, readers may refer to the detailed
guidance offered by the Information Commissioner’s Ofﬁce (17).
Their potential is already visible in several real-world use cases.
For example, federated learning in medical imaging enables hospitals
and research institutions to train artiﬁcial intelligence (AI) models
on images without sharing raw patient data (18, 19). This
improves diagnostic accuracy while ensuring that patient records
remain secure. In Secure Genomic Data Analysis, advanced
encryption methods, such as homomorphic encryption – which
allows data to be analysed while still encrypted (20) – and secure
multiparty computation – which enables multiple parties to work
together on a data without revealing their individual inputs (21) –
allow researchers to study genetic factors in diseases without
exposing sensitive genetic information.
Despite these advances, PETs still face signiﬁcant challenges
before they can be widely adopted in healthcare. Some methods
require signiﬁcant computing power, making them slow for real-
time applications (22). Others face technical hurdles, such as
ensuring different healthcare systems can work together, meeting
strict legal requirements, and developing clear ways to measure
how well these privacy protections work (23). Overcoming these
challenges will require collaboration between medical professionals,
data scientists, legal experts, and policymakers (16).
Integrating PETs into data spaces presents both an opportunity
and a challenge. Within healthcare, data spaces could facilitate
secure and privacy-preserving access to diverse health datasets,
enhancing research, innovation, and patient care. However, as
highlighted by the Towards European Health Data Spaces project
and
recent
studies,
the
integration
of
PETs
into
these
infrastructures remains largely theoretical (11, 12, 15). While
PETs provide mechanisms to safeguard privacy, their practical
deployment within data spaces is hindered by technological,
legal, and governance complexities. The absence of proven
frameworks that effectively combine PETs with data space
architectures reﬂects a gap in both research and implementation.
Bridging these gaps will require interdisciplinary collaboration to
establish standardised, scalable, and interoperable approaches that
can ensure both data protection and utility within emerging data
spaces (15, 24).
3 Method
In consideration of the research questions, and to identify
patterns in the qualitative data, we followed the conventional two
stage coding process (26, 27). To code the data, we used the
qualitative data analysis software ATLAS.ti. Additionally, we
employed
its
Conversational
AI
function
to
validate
the
categories and assess the completeness of supporting quotes,
using anonymised interview transcripts to mitigate the risk of re-
identiﬁcation of interviewees. All interviews were conducted in
the presence of two researchers to enhance reliability and reduce
interviewer bias. The initial coding book was developed by one
researcher and tested on a sample basis by the other interviewers
to ensure consistency and clarity. A fourth researcher, who was
not involved in the data collection, independently reviewed a
subset of the coded material to provide external validation. The
research
team
represented
diverse
disciplinary
backgrounds,
including
public
health,
information
technology,
law,
and
This research followed an inductive, empirical approach
whereby semi-structured interviews are the primary source of

--- Page 5 ---
Category (concerns)
Risks
Statement
1. Open Code
(risk)
2. Selective
Code
(concern)
4.1.1 Concern: patient-doctor relationship
The interviewees mention concerns that secondary use of
health data will become detrimental to the traditional patient-
doctor relationship.
4.1.1.1 Loss of conﬁdentiality
Interviewees raised concerns about the potential impact that
implementation of the EHDS may have on the doctor-patient
relationship,
particularly
the
potential
detriment
of
“conﬁdentiality” (I4; I7; I8; I10; I11) and “trust” (I10; I15). The
fear that “the conﬁdentiality between patient and doctor is lost
because neither the patient nor the doctor can guarantee that
conﬁdentiality will exist in the future” (I10) underscores this risk.
governance, which supported reﬂexivity and enriched the analysis.
Table 1 provides samples of how we coded statements.
Stage 1. Open coding: During the ﬁrst stage, open coding,
we assigned initial codes that captured key ideas or actions
and loosely grouped them in terms of risks. These codes
were descriptive and closely aligned with the language of
the
participants,
ensuring
that
our
analysis
remained
grounded
in
their
perspectives
(26).
As
group
of
researchers,
by
engaging
in
an
iterative
and
dynamic
process of debate, we reﬁned and expanded the codes as
new insights emerged during repeated engagement with the
data (30). This stage allowed us to explore the data in an
open and unbiased manner, laying a solid foundation for
the
subsequent
stages
of
analysis
by
organizing
it
into
manageable and meaningful segments.
Stage 2. Selective coding: We built on the initial open coding by
identifying relationships and connections between the codes to
form broader categories and themes in terms of concerns. This
stage involved systematically organizing the data around central
concepts, focusing on how different codes interacted within
speciﬁc contexts, causal relationships, and outcomes (26). This
process enabled us to move beyond descriptive analysis, allowing
us to develop a deeper understanding of the data and to answer
our
research
questions.
Throughout
both
stages
we
also
identiﬁed a number of ways to address the risks, labelled as
solutions. We identiﬁed these in Stage 1 and grouped them
under one, separate category from the concerns in Stage 2.
4.1.1.2 Withholding information
Patients may withhold information due to uncertainty about data
privacy, leading to a shift in the traditional dynamics of medical
consultations. As one interviewee noted, “they fear that, well,
they will not be able to be sincere, to tell everything” (I7).
Additionally, the perception that “commercial access to health
data” threatens trust between patients and healthcare providers
was emphasised, with concerns that “people trust in it [the
doctor-patient relationship], and it is a larger risk than people
account for” (I15). This fear of secondary use of data may, in
turn,
discourage
patients
from
fully
disclosing
information
during medical visits, potentially compromising the recieved care.
4 Results
4.1 Concerns and risks
We present the results in terms of risks which we mapped to a
higher-order category of concerns. Table 2 provides an overview of
these. In the subsequent sections, we discuss each of the
identiﬁed risks.
4.1.1.3 Avoidance of healthcare services
Interviewees pointed out that consequence of this distrust is the
potential
avoidance
of
healthcare
services
(I7;
I10).
One
interviewee expressed that “if it goes like this, then I will just not
go to the doctor, so they will avoid care” (I7), suggesting that
diminished trust in medical conﬁdentiality may lead to long-term
public health challenges. If patients fear that their health data
may be repurposed beyond their control, they may be reluctant
to seek medical attention, undermining (preventive) care efforts.

--- Page 6 ---
4.1.2 Concern: public beneﬁt and commercial
gains
The interviewees raised the concern that health data within the
EHDS may be used disproportionately for private commercial
proﬁt rather than public beneﬁt.
lot of resources becoming dominant players and monopolising
research opportunities (I13). Without proper safeguards, “small
and medium enterprises may struggle to access data” (I16),
reinforcing existing inequalities in the health data economy.
These concerns reﬂect fears that, despite the goal of the EHDS to
make data more accessible, the process may inadvertently favour
those who already have the capacity to meet its demands.
4.1.3 Concern: regulation vs. innovative capacity
The interviewees raised the concern that excessive regulation
within the EHDS could hinder innovation and the capacity for
progress in the healthcare sector.
4.1.2.1 Commercial exploitation
The potential for “commercial and private entities” to access
sensitive data was seen as controversial (I3; I4; I7; I8; I10), with
fears that individuals would “pay twice, ﬁrst with [their] data for
big companies, and then again for expensive medicines” (I7).
This perception of economic exploitation raises ethical concerns
about whether large corporations will return the value derived
from health data “to society and not to the shareholders’
pockets” (I7). Another interviewee expressed the need to “not
make some pharmaceutical companies more rich [sic] to say very
bluntly” (I16). There is also a mention of the potential risk that
“hospitals are going to see the data that they acquired from
patients as something that they can sell and make money on” (I11).
4.1.3.1 Over-regulation as barrier to innovation and
oversight
Interviewees raised the risk that the introduction of yet another
regulation could further complicate an already complex legislative
landscape,
hindering
collaboration
and
slowing
innovation,
particularly for smaller companies. Fragmentation was seen as
“hampering innovation and speed of innovation, certainly by
small companies, because you need time and deep pockets to
really get there” (I11). Differences in national regulations add to
this challenge, as “some countries already had some national
regulations about secondary users” (I8), making alignment across
borders difﬁcult.
Furthermore, overlapping regulatory frameworks – such as
GDPR, Medical Device Regulation (MDR), and the AI Act –,
were seen as creating confusion. One interviewee noted that
“there is a lot of cross-stop between different regulations at the
moment” (I16). Beyond the impact on innovation, excessive
regulatory complexity also threatens public trust. If procedures
are perceived as too intricate or opaque, individuals
may
disengage
from
the
system
altogether.
As
one
interviewee
warned, “probably the worst thing that can happen to us is to
lose trust. And the reason is that the procedures are complex”
(I7). Without clear, harmonised guidelines, both industry and
citizens
may
struggle
to
navigate
the
system,
ultimately
undermining its intended beneﬁts.
4.1.2.2 Lack of public beneﬁt from secondary data use
Interviewees pointed out that health data is “a proﬁtable product”
(I4; I16), and questioned “how can these gains feed back into the
community?” (I4) and wondered how to make this secondary
data use “for the public good, [to] make our lives better” (I16).
The lack of mechanisms to ensure that “value created with
research
projects
will
trickle
down
to
society”
(I15)
was
highlighted as a structural vulnerability of EHDS.
Additionally, public perception plays a crucial role. If citizens
believe their “sensitive personal data is out there for not the right
purposes,” they are more likely to “enforce their right to opt out”
(I16). This, in turn, creates “a really large risk that a lot of opt-
outs will come” (I15), ultimately undermining the system.
Furthermore, interviewees stressed that public beneﬁt cannot
be realised if data use exposes individuals to harm (I8; I14).
Beyond concerns about value distribution, they pointed to ethical
risks such as misuse by commercial actors. One interviewee
noted the challenge of determining who should access data,
warning of “a risk of maybe misusing data, like insurance
companies and so on” (I8). Safeguards against such misuse are
therefore
important
to
ensure
that
public
beneﬁt
is
both
meaningful and ethically sound.
4.1.2.3 Unequal access to the health data economy
A recurring risk raised by the interviewees was that EHDS may
disproportionately beneﬁt large corporations while excluding
smaller organisations. The complexity and resource requirements
of obtaining data access were seen as a potential barrier that may
prevent smaller organisations from having the same access as
larger ones. Interviewees highlighted that navigating the EHDS
application
process
requires
signiﬁcant
expertise,
time,
and
resources, which are more likely to be available to larger
organisations. As one interviewee noted, “only the very big
companies can do these kinds of things because they have the
deep pockets” (I11). There were calls to “ensure that it’s not just
the big companies who beneﬁt from this most [sic]” (I4), and to
prevent a scenario where standardisation leads to entities with a
4.1.3.2 Ambiguity in roles, responsibilities and enforcement
Another risk raised by interviewees is the ambiguity surrounding
roles and responsibilities in health data governance. While many
referred to “owner” or “ownership” (I3; I6; I11; I14) of data, this
term
is
not
explicitly
deﬁned
within
the
EU
regulatory
framework. Instead, their concerns appeared to relate to the
rights and obligations associated with data use and control. As
one interviewee questioned, “if you combine from two different
sources […] then who’s [responsible] for the new data set? And
that is something which has not been deﬁned yet” (I14).
In addition, the mechanisms of “enforcement” (I14, I16) are
also
uncertain.
Interviewees
expressed
concerns
about
accountability, asking, “who checks these things right? Who
checks the archiving? Who checks the obligation to publish the
results? Who checks the information to the data holder?” (I16).

--- Page 7 ---
interviewees agreeing that explaining this to all patients would be
difﬁcult (I3; I7; I9). As one participant stated, “it’s really naive to
think that we will be able to explain this to everyone” (I7),
highlighting the risk that many patients would struggle to fully
understand how their data would be used. Health practitioners
are not suspected to have the time to explain how the data
registration might be repurposed for secondary use, as stated by
another interviewee, “I don’t think we can expect that they have
time to explain this to the [patients]” (I9). The issue of
information overload was also raised, with interviewees stressing
the
need
for
a
more
structured
approach
to
presenting
information (I5; I7). One interviewee suggested: “please make it
layered […] so people always ask me how to inform patients.
They don’t understand” (I7), underscoring the importance of a
tiered system that would allow patients to better process and
retain the necessary information about data usage.
4.1.4 Concern: consent and control
4.1.4.1 Coarse opt-out due to lack of granularity
Interviewees raised the risk that broad, non-speciﬁc opt-out
options could undermine the beneﬁts of data sharing. One
interviewee warned about “the opt-out system that is not
granular and people might opt out a lot […] [Subsequently] it
won’t have the beneﬁt that we want” (I15). The lack of
granularity in the opt-out system would pose issues, as “the opt-
out is a bit an all or nothing […] if this is just about sound
research by public organizations, then you might not have a
problem with it. Well, you would have a problem with it when a
commercial party would take that data to improve systems or
improve medical technologies” (I8). Furthermore, interviewees
highlighted that people are generally reluctant to share data
freely: “people really don’t want […their] data to be available just
like that” (I7).
Lastly, the lack of options for differentiating between types of
data usage was also mentioned. It was noted that “if you cannot
differentiate […] maybe I will say ‘okay’, the thing of mental
health weighs heavier than the thing on my thumb, so I will say
‘no’ to all” (I12). This is an indication for a need for more
nuanced consent options.
4.1.4.2 Transparency and trust
Interviewees agreed that ensuring transparency was essential for
maintaining trust, but also noted that failure to communicate
effectively could lead to widespread scepticism. One participant
noted, “if people do not have the opportunity to know what is
happening […] I am afraid that there are going to be certain
sectors of society that will just catalyse a complete anti-
movement” (I9). Furthermore, interviewee 9 pointed out that
vulnerable groups might already have low trust in the system.
Another interviewee remarked that “once you lose trust […]
people would just stop trusting the system […] when you’re
talking about vulnerable groups, the trust is already low in the
system” (I7).
In
this
context,
some
interviewees
emphasized
that
transparency should foster trust, but that if data usage was
perceived as vague or not beneﬁcial to the public, it could lead to
distrust. One participant cautioned that “this transparency should
enhance trust. But if there’s all the time published [sic] that data
is used for use cases where the public doesn’t necessarily
understand the beneﬁt of yet […] it can be interpreted as
something that is not beneﬁcial” (I13).
4.1.5 Concern: data accuracy and minimisation
4.1.5.1 Loss of context and misinterpretation
Some of the interviewees raised concerns that the data made
available through the EHDS may not be as useful as hoped for.
This is expected due to the loss of contextual information that
makes
it
useful.
One
interviewee
noted
that
“you
lose
information about the context if you are not the data holder,
hence more prone to wrong interpretation. Therefore knowledge
transfer should be done right” (I4). The separation between the
data holder and data user may make this worse as “the quality of
research is improved through contact with the data holder. And
that link has severed under the EHDS scheme which is a very
apparent vulnerability in the new system,” adding that it is a
problem that is “overlooked” (I15).
Furthermore, data entry practices may be different across
medical facilities and even departments within the same facility,
and “as a result, when datasets are merged, inconsistencies arise
due to varying data deﬁnitions.” (I3) The measures used may
also vary similarly: “health data is messy. It’s just very messy
data. And everywhere, even per hospital, you can have seven
different ways in which like a ﬂu virus is being measured” (I4).
When data is used outside its original context, researchers may
misinterpret its meaning. “When you do your research and draw
conclusions from the data, you present it to the database holders
[…] and then they go like, you can’t interpret that from our
data. It’s not meant that way” (I15). Cross-border data sharing
intensiﬁes this issue, as “if somebody from Italy comes to the
Netherlands and asks for the data, there’s always the risk of
misinterpretation because they don’t know why or how the data
was originally collected” (I8).
4.1.5.2 Lack of incentives for quality assurance
Interviewees raised the concern that there may not be sufﬁcient
incentives to ensure appropriate data quality, as improved data
quality does not create any beneﬁts for the individuals entering
the data in the system. A separation can further be made here
between the incentives for data holders, illustrated by “[…] [data
holders] can only charge for the time spent preparing the data,
not for maintaining the database itself. This creates ﬁnancial
4.1.4.3 Ensuring informed consent
Interviewees raised concerns regarding the challenges of obtaining
informed consent under EHDS, particularly in relation to the
complexity of explaining how health data is reused and the
difﬁculties in ensuring patient comprehension. It was emphasised
that the informed consent process would be challenging due to
the
uncertainty
surrounding
the
use
of
health
data.
One
participant noted: “the informed consent procedure will become
rather challenging because a patient does not know what’s going
to happen with their data” (I3). It was widely supported that the
complexity of the consent process might lead to confusion, with

--- Page 8 ---
interest coming from national law or policy somewhere. […] It
would be very good if this deﬁnition of public interest is at the
EU level, because what you will get is that people are going to
shop data.” A uniﬁed deﬁnition at the EU level could mitigate
the issue of data “shopping” across different jurisdictions (I7).
sustainability issues for research databases, impacting researchers,
patients, and healthcare providers alike” (I15) and clinicians or
doctors entering the data. In other words, “the way that this data
is registered doesn’t follow these quality standards, because
clinicians or the doctors introducing this data in their clinical
setting […] follow their own ways of stating things. The quality
is not their main aim” (I2).
4.1.5.3 Enforcing data minimisation
One interviewee raised concerns regarding the lack of available
clarity on the metadata requirements. The interviewee stated, “we
have raised multiple times, the current metadata format limits
the way you can express the data minimisation […]. It does not
have the capability to state variables, to deﬁne the variables that
are in a given dataset. It just describes the dataset. So you can
request a full dataset, which doesn’t follow the minimisation
concept.” (I2).
4.2 Solutions
4.2.1.2 Standardisation & compliance
To ensure effective innovation in healthcare, a standardised legal
process should be established. Notably, “to stimulate innovation
in healthcare in a good way, it would be good to have a sort of
standardised legal process that everybody’s using” (I11). In
addition to that standardisation, regular audits play a crucial role
in maintaining compliance. It was highlighted that “there will be
some audits making sure that they are also compliant” (I8).
Interviewee
11
reinforced
the
importance
of
accountability
through established audit frameworks, explaining, “if you have an
ISO 27001 or an N7510, or these kinds of things, you do regular
audits to check on the accountability. I think that works, so that
is a good way.” Implementing standardised legal processes and
compliance audits can help create a more secure and efﬁcient
healthcare innovation ecosystem.
Two higher order categories of solutions emerge from the data.
First, we grouped those solutions together which pertain to
governance and organisational processes (policy). Second, we
grouped those solutions that pertain to technological tools.
Table 3 provides an overview of these. In the subsequent
sections, we discuss each of the identiﬁed solutions.
4.2.1.3 Public engagement & awareness
Raising public awareness is essential to ensure that citizens
understand how their data is collected and used. Interviewee 8
emphasises the importance of informing people about data
collection and their rights, stating the importance of “raising
awareness on a society level […] for citizens to know that this
data is being collected [and that] there is an opt-out option.”
Beyond awareness, maintaining trust and engagement requires
ongoing communication with individuals whose data is being
used. The need for transparency and long-term engagement,
explaining, “if you really want to get patients on board for a
longer term […] you always have to give them feedback. […] So
this feedback - and this is also the sense of understanding what
is happening with their data - [is] why they were altruistic or
they showed solidarity” (I7). Without such efforts, data collection
risks becoming meaningless to the individuals involved: “citizens
should know that their data are being collected and used and
reused […] Otherwise, I think [the EHDS] will be like an empty
shell” (I8). These perspectives highlight the importance of raising
awareness and fostering an ongoing relationship of trust through
transparency and feedback.
4.2.1 Governance & policy
4.2.1.1 Data governance & responsibility
Interviewees proposed solutions that we broadly categorised under
improvements
to
data
governance,
responsibilities,
and
accountability. Speciﬁcally, “part ownership and responsibilities”
need to be better deﬁned and “mandated” because “if you have
the clear rules and responsibilities and ownership, then someone
can
also
be
accountable
for
it”
(I14).
In
terms
of
data
management, it suggested that data be kept “at the sensor itself,”
to “keep it as much as possible at its source,” (I2) advocating for
the maintenance of data control at its origin.
Adding to these points, Interviewee 4 emphasised that the
concept of public value should be carefully deﬁned together with
the “value that is actually added.” That deﬁnition, should be
developed “in consultation, with communities who actually face
speciﬁc diseases or health conditions” (I4). Similarly, it was
highlighted that the importance of a clear deﬁnition of public
interest, noting that “you have to have a clear deﬁnition of public
Category
Solution
4.2.1.4 Consent & opt-out mechanisms
Ensuring transparency and user control over data sharing requires
a structured and accessible approach to information and consent
mechanisms. In response, it was suggested to “layer information”
such that “on a website, [there is] some very basic information”
and “if people are not interested at all, they can even skip it.
And then you can fold out more information, and then [even]
more information for those of us who are really very concerned
about privacy” (I7). This method allows users to engage with
privacy details at their preferred level of depth. Interviewee 7 also
emphasises the importance of deﬁning speciﬁc opt-in categories,
particularly
for
genomic
data,
mental
health
data,
and
behavioural
data,
explaining
that
“these
are
by
deﬁnition

--- Page 9 ---
conditions. As one interviewee put it, “you will always log
your credentials when you access information…such a system
could…help with accountability and logging” (I13). Another
noted that logging could be a key measure to mitigate risks by
“log[ging] every data request…in a system that belongs to the
patient”
(I10).
Although
seen
primarily
as
a
technical
implementation, logging was cited as essential for fostering
trust
and
ensuring
compliance
through
traceable
access
records (I10; I13).
sensitive, extra sensitive.” The suggestion was made to make “opt-
outs, opt-ins […] more mixed and more granular.”
However, the effectiveness of opt-in and opt-out mechanisms
depends on their usability. Interviewee 8 raised concerns about
the practicality of opt-out systems, questioning, “whether the
opt-out is as easy to use as when you did not opt-out at the very
beginning. So do you send reminders, or do people have to go
with it? They forget about it.” To improve ﬂexibility, Interviewee
12 proposes an adaptive opt-in/opt-out system that allows
individuals to make decisions on a case-by-case basis, stating,
“we are more looking at a different approach that you have a
single switch opt-out, opt-in for all health data to be used for
secondary use for research health and innovation. [Such that] for
each attempt that your data is requested that you are able to opt
out.”
A centralised administration for managing opt-in and opt-out
requests could streamline the process and reduce the burden on
individuals. Interviewee 12 highlights the advantages of such a
system: “instead of making an opt-out or opt-in with each
different health Institute, go to the centralised administration,
[which] will give the data subject less administrative burden.
Also will give this person the opportunity to have insight into
what
is
happening
with
the
data
about
them.”
Finally,
simplifying the process is crucial, as Interviewee 10 suggests, to
“ﬁt it all on one page,” reinforcing the need for clarity and ease
of use in data-sharing decisions.
4.2.2.2 Federated systems & privacy-enhancing
technologies
Federated systems and Privacy-Enhancing Technologies (PETs)
are
highlighted
as
essential
solutions
to
strengthen
data
protection while enabling meaningful analysis (I2; I3; I13; I16).
Interviewee
2
stresses
the
importance
of
enforcing
PETs.
Speciﬁcally, using “advanced security technologies, such as
homomorphic encryption, could enhance data protection while
allowing for analysis. It limits the information that is made
available for analysis.” Similarly, Interviewee 13 advocates for
early
integration
of
these
tools,
arguing
that
“[privacy-
enhancing] technologies are very useful and [that] they actually
should
be
implemented
from
drafting
[the
technical
and
governance architecture] already.”
Likewise, a federated approach was repeatedly emphasised as a
way to enhance security while minimising direct data exposure.
Interviewee 13 noted that such a system “should allow for more
safety,” while Interviewee 3 points out its ethical advantages,
explaining that “federated ways of sharing data…lead to fewer
challenges on ethics purposes.” Federated learning, in particular,
was highlighted as a way to prevent unnecessary data transfers.
As Interviewee 3 explains, “if we use more federated learning,
then you are not really releasing personal data to the researcher.”
This principle extends to federated analysis environments, where
research can be conducted without requiring centralised data
storage. Interviewee 12 describes such an approach: “it could be
a federated analysis environment. It doesn’t have to be a
centralised solution. So a secure process environment can still be
dealt with locally with a federated approach.” These measures
aim to reduce unnecessary data exposure while maintaining
usability for research and analysis.
4.2.2.3 Data quality assurance
Ensuring data quality is another aspect of facilitating the
secure and effective secondary use of health data within the
EHDS. A key initiative in this regard is the “Quantum
project” according to interviewees (I2; I12), which aims to
establish a standardised quality label for data holders. As
Interviewee 2 explains, Quantum seeks to deﬁne “a label
regarding
the
quality
[and]
the
obligation
of
the
data
holder,”
a
point
also emphasised
by
Interviewee 12.
By
introducing standardised “quality assurance measures” (I11),
such initiatives help enhance data reliability, ensuring that
secondary use is based on accurate, well-maintained and
trustworthy datasets (I2; I11; I12).
4.2.2 Technological
4.2.2.1 Access control & data minimisation
Controlled access and data minimisation are key measures to
address data security concerns, such as inefﬁcient authentication,
privacy breaches, and the risks associated with secondary use of
health data under the EHDS. Ensuring secure access begins with
robust credential and access control mechanisms, as Interviewee
13 emphasises: “this starts with the right credential and that the
person who gets access…is granted on a legal basis.” Similarly,
Interviewee 14 highlights the need for an accreditation process to
strengthen
authentication,
stating:
“you
have
the
whole
identiﬁcation and authentication process…so you know who is
exactly applying for permits and accessing your data.” Effective
identity and access management further requires clear permit
criteria, deﬁning “what can you do on which data, on what level,
for how long, from which environment” (I14).
To
prevent
unauthorised
dissemination,
controlled
environments ensure data remains secure and traceable. As
Interviewee 14 asserts, “data should be accessible indirectly
only…it should be in controlled environments at all times.”
Additionally, the principle of data minimisation, keeping data as
close to its source as possible, was emphasised by Interviewee 2:
“you keep it at the sensor itself…keep it as much as possible at
its source.”
In line with ensuring accountability and transparency,
interviewees
highlighted
the
importance
of
implementing
systematic logging mechanisms. Logging serves not only as a
technical tool but also as a means to uphold governance
principles by recording who accesses data and under what

--- Page 10 ---
4.3 Privacy-enhancing technologies
adoption
The interviews reveal signiﬁcant gaps in the adoption of PETs
within the EHDS, and many participants highlight the limited
depth of knowledge and development. Several interviewees noted
that PETs, such as federated learning, are still largely in
theoretical stages (I5, I16), and the necessary expertise is not
widespread (I11). This suggests a need for further research into
knowledge dissemination and training frameworks to address
these gaps.
A recurring theme is the absence of standardised frameworks
for the implementation of PETs (I4, I14, I15), particularly in
relation to data ownership and access. As one interviewee states,
“there should be a clearer rule set about which data needs to be
separate from other data” (I14). This implies that research into
the development of regulatory frameworks and best practices for
PETs would be highly valuable.
Concerns about the trade-off between security and user-
friendliness also emerged, with one interviewee noting, “if
something becomes more secure, it [often] also becomes
less user-friendly” (I4). This need for more accessible PET
usage for researchers is highlighted by other interviewees as
well (I7, I8).
Finally, the need for automatic enforcement of PETs was
emphasised. An interviewee remarked: “you shouldn’t be the one
that applies this technology; you should use a system where these
privacy-enhancing technologies are enforced” (I2). This indicates
the need for research to create systems that automatically
integrate PET, reducing the dependence on researchers for
manual implementation.
5 Discussion
5.1 Reﬂection on the risk-solution map
independently, a key ﬁnding is the interconnectedness of risks and
solutions (refer to Figure 2). Our results reveal that several
solutions
link
to
multiple
concerns.
Most
notably
“public
engagement and awareness”, which address eleven of the identiﬁed
challenges, underscoring their central role in mitigating systemic
risks. This strong interdependence highlights the necessity of an
integrated strategy for EHDS implementation, prioritising highly
correlated solutions that are likely to yield the greatest impact. We
further elaborate on the identiﬁed risks, putting them within the
broader context of existing literature.
The identiﬁed risks and solutions are consistent with existing
literature,
which
underscores
that
large-scale
health
data
initiatives thrive only when clear regulatory frameworks, trust,
and robust technological safeguards are in place (31, 33, 34).
However, our study adds a new dimension by emphasizing the
structural imbalances in access to the health data economy,
revealing
the
risk
of
reinforcing
disparities
rather
than
democratizing data access.
This highlights an important balance that is also likely to be
relevant beyond the EHDS - i.e., the balance between over-
regulation and effective regulation. On one hand, the EHDS
raises concerns that it adds to the regulatory burden already
faced, for instance, by hospitals or smaller companies. Our study
highlights
the
operational
burdens
the
EHDS
places
on
healthcare
providers.
The
administrative
and
technical
requirements
—
ranging
from interoperability standards
to
compliance costs — pose substantial challenges, particularly for
smaller organizations with limited resources. This resonates with
ﬁndings from digital health governance research, which warns
that
while
policy-driven
interoperability
initiatives
aim
to
streamline data exchange, they often overlook the real-world
constraints of healthcare providers (5, 35). Our study reinforces
this concern but expands on it by showing how smaller
enterprises and non-dominant actors may struggle to participate
in the health data economy, exacerbating existing inequalities.
On the other hand, the potential ambiguity of the legislation
raises
a
separate
set
of
concerns
about
how effective
its
deﬁnitions and frameworks shall be. One of the concerns raised
in our analysis, for instance, is the ambiguity in key deﬁnitions –
such as “data holder,” “electronic health data,” and “public
beneﬁt” – within the EHDS. This lack of clarity, also noted in
recent regulatory critiques (8, 9), creates room for divergent
interpretations across member states, ultimately hindering the
uniform application of EHDS rules. Furthermore, the broad
scope of the regulation — including both clinical and wellness-
related data — raises signiﬁcant privacy concerns.
While the EHDS builds upon the GDPR, our ﬁndings suggest
that the current framework does not sufﬁciently address the unique
challenges posed by secondary data use in health research. This
aligns with ongoing debates on how to balance the societal
beneﬁts of secondary data use with individual rights and
informed consent (8, 10), and highlights the risks associated with
making additional legislation, especially in a regulatory landscape
as complex as healthcare and use of secondary data.
Another issue that emerges is the potential erosion of patient-
doctor conﬁdentiality and its implications for trust in healthcare.
The interviews allowed us to map the solutions to risks. This
mapping process was carried out on an iterative basis by the ﬁrst
four authors, each bringing their domain-speciﬁc expertise to the
task.
The
researchers
collaboratively
linked
solutions
to
corresponding risks, with the process grounded in their collective
judgment and interpretation. The mapping exercise is presented
in Figure 2. For a detailed overview of which speciﬁc risks and
solutions are linked, a corresponding table is provided in the
Supplementary Material, as not all relationships can be clearly
traced in this ﬁgure.
The EHDS introduces a transformative regulatory framework for
European health data governance, whose effectiveness depends on
the calibration of risk management and data utility (5, 31, 32).
Our study highlights ﬁve concerns, fourteen related risks and
seven solution directions associated with its implementation,
particularly in data governance, privacy, and the execution of data-
sharing mechanisms for secondary use of health data as enshrined
in the data permits. While we initially examined the challenges

--- Page 11 ---
intersectional aspect between the governance- and technology-
driven solutions, which is particularly relevant in, for instance,
ensuring
the
understandability
of
and
equal
access
to
the legislation.
Finally, our study underscores the need to view data permits
within a broader governance framework. Rather than treating
them as isolated regulatory tools, data permits should be
embedded within a comprehensive strategy for responsible data
stewardship. This aligns with recent research advocates for
participatory
governance
models
(38),
where
transparency,
stakeholder engagement, and continuous risk assessment guide
the ethical use of health data (39).
5.2 A research agenda for the role of
privacy-enhancing technologies within the
EHDS
Prior research has already highlighted that patients’ willingness to
share data depends on perceived control and transparency (36).
Our ﬁndings go further by demonstrating that the lack of a clear
deﬁnition of “public beneﬁt” in the EHDS exacerbates this
distrust. Without transparent communication of how data will be
used and for whose gain, public scepticism could undermine
participation, reducing the effectiveness of the EHDS in fostering
health data-driven research and innovation.
Addressing these risks requires solutions that are both
governance- and technology-driven. On the governance side,
clearer legal deﬁnitions and harmonized policies across member
states
are
essential
to
prevent
regulatory
fragmentation.
Additionally, a more explicit articulation of “public beneﬁt”—
grounded in democratic deliberation and citizen engagement—
along with mandatory mechanisms or commitments to ensure
such
public
beneﬁt
could
help
strengthen
trust.
On
the
technology side, PETs such as federated learning offer promising
solutions to mitigate privacy risks while enabling secure data use
[see Raab et al. (37)]. However, our ﬁndings reinforce that
technology alone cannot replace strong governance. Instead, it
should serve as a supportive mechanism for operationalising
ethical
and
legal
principles.
Crucially,
there
is
also
an
The interviewees stated that technological solutions, like
Privacy-Enhancing
Technologies
(PETs),
are
an
important
solution to some of the concerns. This aligns with previous
studies that emphasize the growing need for robust data privacy

--- Page 12 ---
and
development
of
PETs
(I5,
I16,
I11),
the
absence
of
standardized frameworks (I4, I14, I15), and the trade-off between
security and user-friendliness (I4). Privacy patterns, by providing
a structured approach to designing and implementing PETs, can
ﬁll these gaps by offering clear solutions for data governance,
compliance, consent mechanisms, and access control.
For instance, the “Access Control” pattern offers guidelines on
how to restrict access to sensitive health data, ensuring that only
authorized individuals or systems can view or modify data. This
aligns with the need for stronger regulatory frameworks for data
ownership and access (I14) while supporting the development of
secure, yet user-friendly, PETs. Furthermore, privacy patterns can
contribute
to
automatic
enforcement
of
PETs,
addressing
concerns about the manual application of privacy technologies
(I2). Through these standardized solutions, privacy patterns can
enhance the interoperability, usability, and adoption of PETs in
health data management.
measures in healthcare settings, particularly with the increasing
amount of sensitive health data being shared across various
platforms (16).
For the EHDS in particular, we observe that PETs can play an
important role at various stages, if implemented with appropriate
clear
governance
and
stakeholder
engagement
strategies.
However, the knowledge on this subject remains limited, with a
lack of comprehensive understanding regarding their practical
application, integration, and scalability within the European
health
data
framework.
Further
investigation
is
needed
to
determine how these technologies can be effectively implemented
to balance both privacy and accessibility in the EHDS ecosystem.
PETs, we argue, should be built directly into the governing
apparatus of the EHDS, and be taken into account directly from
the start in line with the privacy-by-design approach, ensuring
that data protection is embedded into the system’s architecture
and vice-versa, rather than added as an afterthought.
Furthermore, it is important to note that the concerns we have
identiﬁed are interconnected - i.e., addressing them in isolation,
and especially without a clear understanding of how technical
and governance aspects interact - is likely ineffective and might
even cause harm rather than good. For example, as important as
it is to ensure that patient data is protected through the
appropriate PETs (Concerns over data security, Concerns over
the patient-doctor relationship), it is also equally important to
identify ways to communicate this to the patient in a way that
enables their trust (Concerns over consent & control). Similarly,
detangling concerns related to public beneﬁt vs. commercial
gains also requires a balanced approach to concerns related to
over- and ambiguous regulation.
In response, we propose an agenda for socio-technical research.
This agenda aims to explore the technical, regulatory, and societal
aspects of PETs in healthcare, focusing on developing actionable
solutions that enhance privacy while enabling the secure sharing
and use of health data across borders, also at the intersection of
governance and technology. The agenda is the following:
5.2.2 Accessible rules, and rules as code
As highlighted in the interviews, gaps exist in level of
understanding different stakeholders have about the EHDS in
general and PETs in speciﬁc, including absence of standardised
frameworks for data ownership and access (I4, I14). Different
resources can and should be developed to make the process of
navigating legal systems easier for stakeholders. Simple, low-tech
resources (such as the the Finish Social and Health Data Permit
Authority website https://ﬁndata.ﬁ/en/) can be developed to
address these gaps by providing clear, accessible guidance on
rights and responsibilities, simplifying complex governance rules,
and helping different actors navigate data governance and
compliance,
particularly
for
small
and
medium
enterprises
(SMEs) and patients. Furthermore, research from the ﬁeld of
legal informatics or “rules as code” (42) presents a promising
line
of
inquiry
with
regards
to
harmonising
regulatory
frameworks and enhance stakeholder engagement. Research in
this ﬁeld aligns closely with the spirit of the privacy-by-design
process,
and
can
assist
in
building
PETs
directly
into
governance structures.
5.2.1 Privacy patterns within the EHDS
Privacy patterns offers a clear framework and guidelines for
managing speciﬁc privacy issues such as data access, consent,
and security. Such patterns are developed to ensure consistency
in privacy practices, helping stakeholders—whether they are
policymakers,
developers,
or
organisations—communicate
effectively and implement solutions in a systematic manner (40,
41). However, no studies so far how privacy patterns can support
the processes within the EHDS.
For example, the “Data Minimisation” pattern advocates for
collecting only the minimal amount of data necessary for a given
purpose. This pattern helps mitigate the risks associated with
over-collection and excessive sharing of personal data. It is an
essential tool in the development of PETs, supporting data
protection while ensuring compliance with privacy regulations
like GDPR [see also Quinn et al. (8)].
Based on the results of our interviews, privacy patterns address
several research gaps in the adoption of PETs within the EHDS.
Key issues raised by interviewees include the limited knowledge
5.2.3 Integrating PETs into the data permit process
To simplify governance in the EHDS and ensure the smooth
ﬂow of data, we propose integrating PET into the Data Permit
process. This approach directly embeds privacy protections into
the data-sharing architecture, ensuring that privacy is considered
throughout the entire data ﬂow, rather than as an afterthought.
Integrating PETs into the Data Permit process can provide clear,
enforceable agreements on data access, usage, and consent,
reducing ambiguity and enhancing transparency. This would
address the challenges raised in the interviews, particularly
around the need for standardised frameworks for data ownership
and access (I4, I14), as well as concerns regarding the trade-off
between security and user-friendliness (I4).
By directly linking Data Permits with technical privacy-
enhancing measures, such as federated learning and access
controls, the governance of health data can be both more secure
and more efﬁcient. The usage of PETs have been discussed in

--- Page 13 ---
to the concerns, focusing on the structural imbalances in access
to the health data economy. Second, and in connection present
literature, it provides a deep dive in the role played by PETs
(RQ3). The second contribution comes in the form of a research
agenda on PETs in the EHDS. We foresee future work to build
on this exploratory research and engage with the research agenda.
As the EHDS is rolled out, numerous stakeholders in the health
space will seek to address the concerns and risks posed. Within that
context, this study acts as a compass - with emphasis on PETs - for
the successful roll out of the data space.
6.1 Limitations
the past, though no clear execution rules or standards are proposed
yet (12). This integrated approach not only aligns with the
principles of privacy-by-design but also supports the automation
of PETs, ensuring their consistent and reliable enforcement
without burdening stakeholders, particularly SMEs and smaller
healthcare providers, with additional administrative overhead.
In addition to access control, PETs such as Federated Learning
and Multi-Party Computation can also serve as privacy-preserving
pre-processing tools to assess the completeness and contextual
richness of data prior to its use. This allows for an initial check of
whether the available data is suitable for purpose, for instance, in
terms of demographic coverage, time interval, or data modalities,
without exposing sensitive content (43). These assessments could
feed into the Data Permit process itself, informing both the granting
decision and the deﬁnition of analysis conditions. This integration
would strengthen the alignment between legal permissions and the
actual utility and limitations of the data, thereby supporting more
informed and proportionate data use decisions.
5.2.4 Veriﬁcation of models with zero-knowledge
proofs
To address the critical issue of data accuracy in the EHDS, we
propose the integration of zero-knowledge proofs (ZKPs) for the
veriﬁcation of AI models. ZKPs can be used to check whether an
large langugage model (LLM) is making the right predictions—
without actually showing how the model works or revealing any of
its secret data (44). This method allows stakeholders to conﬁrm
the integrity and correctness of AI decisions without disclosing
any conﬁdential information, thereby ensuring privacy while
maintaining trust in AI-driven health data systems. For instance, a
healthcare provider could use ZKPs to prove that an AI model has
correctly processed patient data and produced accurate results
without exposing the actual data to external auditors. This
approach aligns with existing research on enhancing privacy in AI
systems,
particularly
in
healthcare
settings
where
data
conﬁdentiality is key (45). By implementing ZKPs, the EHDS can
ensure that AI models remain transparent and trustworthy, while
safeguarding
the
privacy
of
sensitive
health
data,
thereby
promoting the adoption of AI technologies in healthcare while
addressing regulatory concerns over data misuse and accuracy.
There are several limitations to this study that should be
considered
when
interpreting
the
ﬁndings.
Four
of
these
are noteworthy.
First, the interviews were conducted before the ﬁnalisation of
the EHDS. As a result, the participants’ insights may not fully
reﬂect
the
most
recent
developments
or
ﬁnal
regulatory
frameworks surrounding the EHDS. This could have inﬂuenced
the relevance and applicability of their perspectives in the current
context. We addressed this limitation by considering the maturity
of the regulation as of February 2024.
Second, the sample size of interviewees was limited, which may
impact the generalizability of the results (46). A larger, more diverse
sample could provide a broader range of viewpoints and contribute
to a more comprehensive understanding of the topic. We addressed
this limitation by seeking a variety in the interviewees (including
interviewees from healthcare institutions, ministries and academia).
Third, the data coding process may have been inﬂuenced by
conﬁrmation bias, where the researchers inadvertently focused on
information
that
supported
pre-existing
hypotheses
or
expectations. To mitigate this limitation, we involved a fourth
researcher in reviewing our initial draft ﬁndings, ensuring a
critical evaluation of our results.
Fourth, most participants were based in the Netherlands, a
country with a relatively strict regulatory environment for health
data reuse (47). Although this may limit generalisability to more
permissive contexts, it offers valuable insight into challenges in
stricter regimes. Many of the identiﬁed issues, such as balancing
privacy with public beneﬁt, are likely to resonate in different
governance settings, though with varying emphasis.
6 Conclusion
Data availability statement
The anonymised raw data supporting the conclusions of this
article will be made available by the authors upon reasonable request.
Ethics statement
This research presented an inductive, empirical approach
rooted in semi-structured interviews to study the conditions for
ethical secondary use of data under EHDS. The interviews
revealed a number of concerns and risks associated with the
EHDS. They also revealed potential solutions to these risks, on
the level of governance and policy as well as technology.
The contributions of this research are two fold. First, it presents
a mapping of said concerns and risks to prospective solutions (RQ1
and RQ2). This reveals the interconnectedness of risks and
solutions, underscoring the central role of certain solutions, such
as
public
engagement
and
awareness,
in
addressing
these
challenges. Additionally, the study introduces a new dimension
Written informed consent was obtained from the individual(s)
for the publication of any potentially identiﬁable images or data
included in this article.

--- Page 14 ---
Author contributions
Generative AI statement
The author(s) declare that Generative AI was used in the
creation
of
this
manuscript.
Within
Atlas.ti
we
used
the
Conversational AI function to verify if the same list of quotes
and assumption of the interviewees supporting our statements, or
even more could be found. We always fact-checked the output.
SD: Conceptualization, Data curation, Investigation, Writing –
review & editing, Writing – original draft. KC: Conceptualization,
Data
curation,
Investigation,
Writing
–
review
&
editing,
Writing – original draft. TB: Conceptualization, Data curation,
Investigation, Writing – review & editing, Writing – original
draft. DS: Conceptualization, Data curation, Writing – review &
editing,
Writing
–
original
draft.
LB:
Conceptualization,
Writing – review & editing.
Publisher’s note
Funding
All claims expressed in this article are solely those of the
authors and do not necessarily represent those of their afﬁliated
organizations, or those of the publisher, the editors and the
reviewers. Any product that may be evaluated in this article, or
claim that may be made by its manufacturer, is not guaranteed
or endorsed by the publisher.
The author(s) declare that ﬁnancial support was received for
the research and/or publication of this article. This research is
funded
by
TNO’s
Early
Research
Program
called
’Next
Generation Cryptography’.
Conﬂict of interest
Supplementary material
The Supplementary Material for this article can be found online
at:
https://www.frontiersin.org/journals/digital-health/articles/10.
3389/fdgth.2025.1602101/full#supplementary-material
The authors declare that the research was conducted in the
absence of any commercial or ﬁnancial relationships that could
be construed as a potential conﬂict of interest.
References

--- Page 15 ---
